COMPANY OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY STATEMENT

We are committed to providing a safe, accident-free, and healthy work
environment for everyone. However, safe and healthy conditions do not
occur by chance. They are the result of diligent work and careful
attention to all company policies by everyone.

Safety demands cooperation on everyone's part. Thus, it is important
that communication be kept open at all times between the management and
employees. Workers who notice hazards or other safety problems, or feel
that they need additional training, must notify their supervisor.
Supervisors and management at all levels must address these concerns and
take corrective action when warranted.

Everyone is obligated to know the safety standards for their area or job
and to abide by them. Supervisors must instill a positive attitude and
safety awareness in their workers through personal adherence, personal
contact, training, and regularly scheduled safety meetings. It is the
duty of all employees to perform their work with maximum regard for the
safety of themselves and co-workers.

Our safety policies are based on past experience and current standards
and are also an integral part of the company's personnel policies. This
means that compliance with the policies is a condition of employment and
must be taken seriously. Failure to comply is sufficient grounds for
disciplinary action or termination of employment.

Safety and health are top priorities in this organization and every bit
as important as productivity and quality. In fact, they go hand in hand.
Of course, the best reason for you to observe these policies is because
it's in your own self-interest to do so. Conscientiously following them
can help you stay safe, healthy, and able to work, play, and enjoy life
to its fullest.

Signature of [Company Officer Name], [Company Officer Title]

[Company Name]

Signature of [Health and Safety Officer Name], the, [Health and Safety
Officer Title]

[Company Name]

