Revision 2.1 - June 2020

PLEASE READ BELOW AND REFER TO THE USER GUIDE BEFORE PRINTING

DISCLAIMER

This SPFA Model Health and Safety Program is intended to serve as a
reference guide or template ONLY. The contents were developed and
compiled by the SPFA Safety Committee from various sources for
consideration by SPFA-member contractors when developing their own
written safety programs. This document creates no express or implied
relationship or agreement between the SPFA and the contractor or the
contractor’s customers. SPFA does NOT warrant, represent, or guarantee
the safety practices or workmanship of these materials used by any
contractor and specifically disclaims any and all liability and
responsibility for any injuries, losses, or damages of any kind or
nature arising out of a contractor’s performance, materials used, or the
contractor’s use of or reliance upon this document and its contents.

©2014, 2016, 2020 Spray Polyurethane Foam Alliance (SPFA). All Rights
Reserved.

ADMINISTRATION

This document was developed by the SPFA Safety Committee using material
provided by its members. If any errors are found, please report them to
the Safety Committee Chair. These errors will be fixed on an as-needed
basis, and updates to the document will be included in a minor revision:
Revision X.Y, where Y represents the minor revision number. On an annual
basis, the Safety Committee will review the content and update the
document as a major revision: Revision X.Y, where X represents the major
revision number. Users should check the SPFA website for updated
revisions on a regular interval.

NOTE: This document is for the exclusive use of SPFA Member Contractors
and intended as a benefit of membership. It should not be copied or
distributed for use by non-member companies.

INSTRUCTIONS

The attached Health and Safety Program is for your use in developing
your company's program. This program is not complete: It requires your
review and edit before it becomes your program. Work in conjunction with
both Federal and State OSHA Rules and Regulations for General Industry.
Add any categories you need, and remove those that do not apply to your
company. The Statement of Health and Safety Policy will fit any type of
business. It is strongly suggested that you review your final document
with a federal or state OSHA official to be sure it is complete. Federal
OSHA offices and most state OSHA offices offer this review service at
little or no charge without subject to citations or penalties.

a.  Steps to Take in Preparing Your Program:

I.  Review, edit, and print the statement of the Occupational Health and
      Safety Policy on company letterhead. Then date and sign the
      policy.

II. Carefully review the entire program. Delete those items or topics
      that do not apply to your company.

III. Treat this as your core program. Be advised, there are other
       individual, specialized programs, such as a hazard communication
       program, a confined space program, or a respiratory protection
       program, that may be required for your particular company. These
       are listed in the Individual Safety and Health Programs Listing
       along with a brief synopsis of the program. You may incorporate
       these other programs into this core program document, add them as
       appendices to this document, or treat them as separate individual
       programs.

IV. Add those items not listed that you know are required or needed, or
      those policies, programs, or items that as a company you wish to
      include, in the appropriate section. For example, if you require
      safety shoes or safety glasses in your shop areas, state so.

V.  Edit and print your program. Fields highlighted in yellow need to be
      customized for your company and jobsite.

b.  Update Fields and Print/File/Distribute this Main Document.

I.  Click each gray field below ( [Example] ), and replace the
    instruction text with your company’s information:

Company Name: [Company Name]

SPFA Member ID: [SPFA Member ID]

Company Street Address: [Company Street Address]

Company City, State, Zip: [Company City, State, Zip]

Company Phone: [Company Phone]

Company Officer Name: [Company Officer Name]

Company Officer Title: [Company Officer Title]

Health and Safety Officer Name: [Health and Safety Officer Name], the

Health and Safety Officer Title: [Health and Safety Officer Title]

II. Replace all highlighted fields ( {example} ) throughout this
    document with personalized details.

III. Print this document. There is no need to keep Pages i-ii with the
     main document.

health and safety program

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910 and 29 CFR 1926

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

PROFESSIONAL MEMBERSHIPS AND CERTIFICATIONS

[INSERT MEMBER LOGO HERE]

SPFA Member Number: [SPFA Member ID]

[INSERT ACCREDITATION LOGO HERE]

SPFA Contractor Accreditation Number:

SPFA Applicator Certifications

  Employee Name   Certification Level (Highest)   Certification Number
  --------------- ------------------------------- ----------------------
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  

Table of Contents

a.  COMPANY OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY STATEMENT

b.  SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM

    a.  Occupational Health and Safety Act

    b.  Administration Responsibilities

c.  WORKERS’ COMPENSATION CLAIMS MANAGEMENT

    a.  Required Actions

d.  OSHA FORM 300 INJURY/ILLNESS LOG (IF REQUIRED)

e.  HAZARD COMMUNICATION PROGRAM (APPENDIX A)

f.  TRAINING

g.  HAZARD IDENTIFICATION, ASSESSMENT, AND CONTROL

    a.  Formal Health and Safety Inspection Timeline

    b.  Post Inspection Actions

    c.  Health and Safety Inspection Guidelines

h.  HEALTH AND SAFETY RULES

    a.  General Workplace Safety Rules

    b.  Housekeeping

    c.  Fire Prevention

    d.  Industrial Hygiene and Occupational Health

    e.  Personal Protective and Related Equipment

    f.  Lock-out/Tag-out Program

    g.  Electrical

    h.  Guarding

    i.  Compressed Gas Cylinders

    j.  Ladders

    k.  Flammable and Combustible Liquids

    l.  Cranes and Hoists

    m.  Welding and Brazing

    n.  Tools

    o.  Safety Railings and Other Fall Protection

    p.  Scaffolds

    q.  Forklifts

    r.  Aerial lifts

    s.  Excavations and trenches

    t.  Miscellaneous

i.  OSHA WORKERS SAFETY—INDIVIDUAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS LISTING

  Health and Safety Program—Containing Specific Company Health and
  Safety Rules

a.  Hazard Communication Program (Appendix A)

b.  Personal Protective Equipment Hazard Assessment (Appendix B)

c.  Confined Space Entry Program (Appendix C)

d.  Respiratory Protection Program (Appendix D)

e.  Hearing Conservation Program (Appendix E)

f.  Lock-out/Tag-out Program (Appendix F)

g.  Emergency Response Plan (Appendix G)

h.  Fall Protection Plan (Appendix H)

i.  Jobsite Fire Prevention Plan (Appendix I)

j.  Injury and Illness Prevention Program (Appendix J)

k.  Powered Industrial Truck (Forklift) Safety Program (Appendix K)

l.  Spill Prevention and Response Plan (Appendix L)

m.  Asbestos and Lead Hazard Awareness Program (Appendix M)

n.  Blood-Borne Pathogens Program (Appendix N)

o.  Assured Equipment Grounding Program (Appendix O)

p.  Silica Exposure Control Program (Appendix P)

q.  Communicable Disease Control Program (Appendix Q)

j.  

COMPANY OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY STATEMENT

We are committed to providing a safe, accident-free, and healthy work
environment for everyone. However, safe and healthy conditions do not
occur by chance. They are the result of diligent work and careful
attention to all company policies by everyone.

Safety demands cooperation on everyone's part. Thus, it is important
that communication be kept open at all times between the management and
employees. Workers who notice hazards or other safety problems, or feel
that they need additional training, must notify their supervisor.
Supervisors and management at all levels must address these concerns and
take corrective action when warranted.

Everyone is obligated to know the safety standards for their area or job
and to abide by them. Supervisors must instill a positive attitude and
safety awareness in their workers through personal adherence, personal
contact, training, and regularly scheduled safety meetings. It is the
duty of all employees to perform their work with maximum regard for the
safety of themselves and co-workers.

Our safety policies are based on past experience and current standards
and are also an integral part of the company's personnel policies. This
means that compliance with the policies is a condition of employment and
must be taken seriously. Failure to comply is sufficient grounds for
disciplinary action or termination of employment.

Safety and health are top priorities in this organization and every bit
as important as productivity and quality. In fact, they go hand in hand.
Of course, the best reason for you to observe these policies is because
it's in your own self-interest to do so. Conscientiously following them
can help you stay safe, healthy, and able to work, play, and enjoy life
to its fullest.

Signature of [Company Officer Name], [Company Officer Title]

[Company Name]

Signature of [Health and Safety Officer Name], the, [Health and Safety
Officer Title]

[Company Name]

SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM

It is the policy and top priority of this company to provide an
accident-free and comfortable work environment by eliminating recognized
hazards from the workplace. Our health and safety program, and specific
individual programs, have been developed to ensure compliance with
federal, state, and local regulations with emphasis on the Occupational
Health and Safety Rules and Regulations that apply to our operations.

In order to maintain the safety standards desired by our company, it is
necessary to actively pursue an accident prevention program through all
levels of our company, from top management to all employees. Health and
safety are functional responsibilities of each supervisor.

Health and safety are of vital interest to everyone in the company; each
level of our organization is accountable for safe performance.
Compliance with this program and safety and health rules is taken very
seriously. This means that failure to comply is sufficient grounds for
disciplinary action or termination of employment. These policies are an
integral part of the company's personnel policies.

Occupational Health and Safety Act

The Occupational Health and Safety Act of 1970 requires that every
employer engaged in business shall perform the following:

I.  Furnish to each employee a place of employment free from recognized
    hazards that are causing or likely to cause death or serious
    physical harm.

II. Comply with occupational health and safety standards and rules,
    regulations, and orders pursuant to the Act that are applicable to
    company business and operations.

III. Comply with, and require all employees to comply with, occupational
     health and safety standards and regulations under the Act that are
     applicable to their actions and situations.

IV. Encourage employees to contact their immediate superior for
    information that will help them understand their responsibilities
    under the Act.

Administration and Responsibilities

  Our goal is to protect employees from injury while working for our
  company. This must receive top priority from everyone.

  Duties and responsibilities of all personnel under our health and
  safety program are described in the following:

I.  [Health and Safety Officer Title]

-   Administers all aspects of the occupational health and safety
    program

-   Develops programs and technical guidance to identify and remove
    physical, chemical, and biological hazards from facilities,
    operations, and sites

-   Assists management and supervisors in the health and safety training
    of employees

-   Conducts inspections to identify unhealthy or unsafe conditions or
    work practices and completes written reports of inspections

-   Recommends programs and activities that will develop and maintain
    incentives for and motivation of employees in health and safety

-   Recommends disciplinary action for repeat violators of health and
    safety rules

-   Maintains the state health and safety poster, emergency telephone
    numbers, OSHA Form 300, and other notices required by OSHA and
    ensures this information is posted in places where employees can see
    them on each job

-   Develops and maintains accident and incident investigation and
    reporting procedures and systems; investigates serious or reportable
    accidents and takes action to eliminate accident causes (reportable
    incidents consist of fatalities, lost work day cases, and days
    without lost work requiring medical treatment); and keeps management
    informed of findings

-   Report accidents that result in an occupational fatality or three or
    more hospitalized workers within eight (8) hours of occurrence

Project Manager

-   Familiarizes himself or herself with health and safety regulations
      related to his or her area of responsibility

-   Directs, implements, and coordinates health and safety program
      elements and activities within area of responsibility

-   Requires all employees supervised to use individual protective
      equipment and safety devices

-   Ensures that safety equipment is available, maintained, used, and
      stored correctly

-   Ensures that all persons within area of responsibility receive job
      safety and health training as required

-   Conducts {monthly/quarterly} health and safety inspections of work
      area and directs correction of unsafe conditions

-   Conducts {weekly/monthly} safety briefings with all supervisors and
      workers

-   Ensures that supervisors are aware of and comply with requirements
      for safe practices

-   Investigates all accidents within area of responsibility, reviews
      all accidents and incidents with supervisors and workers involved,
      ensures accident reports and Workers' Compensation forms are
      completed and submitted as appropriate, and ensures that
      corrective action is taken immediately to eliminate the cause of
      the accident

-   Requires all subcontractors and subcontractor personnel working
      within the company's facilities to comply with health and safety
      regulations

-   Maintains copies of applicable programs and Workers' Safety forms in
      the work area, in accordance with company practice and policy (for
      example, the hazard communication program, safety data sheets,
      OSHA 300 Injury Log if the work area is not located near or with
      the central office, etc.)

Master Installer (Present on Every Jobsite at All Times)

-   Learns, explains, and enforces health and safety regulations that
      apply to company operations within his or her area of
      responsibility

-   Ensures that persons under his or her supervision use safety devices
      and proper individual protective equipment

-   Instructs and trains all persons within area of responsibility in
      job health and safety requirements, and requires compliance by
      workers with the safety rules established

-   Conducts frequent and regular safety and health inspections of his
      or her work areas and ensures that no unsafe conditions exist in
      area of responsibility

-   Conducts weekly (or more often if needed) safety briefings with all
      workers under his or her supervision

-   Ensures that injuries are treated promptly and reported properly

-   Investigates all accidents and incidents, obtains all pertinent
      data, and takes corrective action

-   Acts on reports of hazards or hazardous conditions made to them by
      employees

Office and Support Staff

-   Maintains all records and reports of accidents that have taken place
      during company operations (these forms and reports may include the
      OSHA Form 300 Injury/Illness Log and the OSHA Form 301
      Supplementary Record of Occupational Injury and Illnesses)

-   Ensures that employee's Report of Occupational Injury or Disease
      report is filed with the Workers' Compensation office within seven
      days of employee's notification of an occupational injury or
      disease

-   Processes all paperwork associated with accidents, on-site
      inspections, and in-house audits and maintains permanent record
      for company files

-   Maintains all medical records, evaluations, and exposure monitoring
      records for a period of 30 years

-   Maintains all training records for a minimum of three (3) years.

All Employees

-   Be familiar with and comply with proper health and safety practices.

-   Use the required safety devices and proper personal protective
      safety equipment.

-   Notify supervisor immediately of unsafe conditions or acts,
      accidents, and injuries.

WORKERS' COMPENSATION CLAIMS MANAGEMENT

Required Actions

The following actions will be taken on all accidents and injuries being
submitted as a Workers' Compensation claim:

I.  Injured employees must report all accidents and injuries to their
    supervisor immediately (within 72 hours), who in turn will notify
    other appropriate company officials, such as the [Health and Safety
    Officer Title]. All accidents and incidents will be investigated by
    the [Health and Safety Officer Title] or Project Manager to
    determine the facts and take corrective action to prevent
    recurrence.

II. Employees, within ten (10) days after notification to the employer,
    must complete the Worker Information section only of the Workers'
    Safety and Compensation Report of the Occupational Injury or Disease
    forms package.

III. The Project Manager will complete the Employer's Information
     section of the same report within seven days of the notification.

IV. The claims manager will ensure that the {State Workers' Safety and
    Compensation Division} is notified as appropriate by filing the
    above report within seven days of the notification.

V.  The accident investigation must confirm that the injury was job
    related for the resultant claim to be valid.

VI. Injured employees will be entered into a modified job program, i.e.,
    light duty, restricted duty, part-time duty, when such is
    recommended by the attending physician.

OSHA FORM 300 INJURY/ILLNESS LOG (If Required)

The OSHA Form 300 log of all recordable occupational injuries and
illnesses is maintained for and at each work facility. In some cases,
the log may be kept at the main office. (This involves ensuring the
information from the initial accident report is posted onto the master
form in the main office within six days after the accident has
occurred.) The summary section of the OSHA Form 300 must be posted at
each work facility or site by February 1st of the following year and
remain in place until March 1st.

HAZARD COMMUNICATION PROGRAM (Appendix A)

This company has a Hazardous Communication Program in place because of
our work with and exposure to hazardous chemicals in the workplace.
Important elements of this program are a written program explaining what
the program is about, a master listing of hazardous chemicals in the
workplace, safety data sheets (SDS) of those chemicals, labeling
requirements of chemicals containers, and training for all employees on
the program and its elements. Employees are encouraged to review this
program at any time.

TRAINING

Training and education cannot be over-emphasized as a means of learning
a healthful and safe approach to employee work effort. Knowledge of the
safety rules and how and when to function under the rules, supplemented
by compliance, is essential to safety.

-   Employees scheduled for any safety and health training will attend
    such training.

-   New employees will be provided orientation training and will be
    furnished information and literature covering the company health and
    safety policies, rules, and procedures. This orientation training
    must be provided prior to the employee's exposure to the work
    environment.

-   Individual job and task training will be provided to all employees.
    Included in this training are the applicable regulations and
    standards for their job; the recognition, avoidance, and prevention
    of unsafe conditions; areas and activities that require personal
    protection equipment; and how to use protective equipment (such as
    respirators, etc.).

-   {Monthly/quarterly} on-going safety training sessions will be
    conducted to provide information and training on new equipment, new
    procedures, new chemicals, refresher/remedial training in specific
    areas, or meet annual requirements. Such training may be held in
    conjunction with the safety briefings or meetings addressed
    elsewhere in this program.

-   Various individual Workers' Safety programs require that
    site-specific training be provided to employees. Supervisors will
    ensure their employees are scheduled and provided this training as
    required. Examples of specified training include (but are not
    limited to) the following:

    -   Fire extinguisher training

    -   Confined space entry

    -   Respirator care and use

    -   Hazard communication

    -   Lock-out/tag-out procedures

    -   Industrial truck/forklift operation

    -   Electrical work

-   The training addressed above will be documented in the employees'
    personnel records, in a master training record, or both.

NOTE: Employers should review their training requirements and include
training timeframes or schedules in this section. Training outlines and
guidelines should also be developed to ensure all areas and items are
covered in this training.

HAZARD IDENTIFICATION, ASSESSMENT, AND CONTROL

Hazard identification and elimination is not only an inherent
responsibility of supervision in providing a safe workplace for
employees but also requires employee involvement. As such, hazard
evaluation and control shall be an on-going concern for all. It is the
responsibility of everyone (management, supervisors, and all employees)
to identify, report, and correct all possible hazards. Employees are
particularly important in this process as they are in the best position
to identify hazards in the workplace and day-to-day operations.
Reporting hazards is a protected activity, and no action will be taken
against anyone for identifying unsafe conditions. Reports should be made
to the Safety Manager or Project Manager for appropriate action.

This company has a procedure for conducting inspections of
workplaces/jobsites for compliance with health and safety rules. The
purpose of the in-house inspection is to identify hazards and unsafe
practices before they cause an injury or accident.

Formal Health and Safety Inspection Timeline

Formal safety and health inspections will be conducted under the
following minimum timelines:

-   [Health and Safety Officer Title]: {Monthly/quarterly} inspections
      of all fixed facilities and shops

-   Project Manager: {Monthly/quarterly} inspections of his or her area
      of responsibility

-   Master Installer: {Weekly/monthly/quarterly} inspections of area of
      responsibility, not in conjunction with the above inspections

-   At least an annual review of the company's health and safety program

-   OSHA, Workers' Safety: {Annually/other} – Technical assistance,
      private consultation services, and insurance company
      representatives conducting on-site consultation and inspections,
      if desired and requested

Post Inspection Actions

After completing jobsite or facility inspections, the person making the
inspection will perform the following:

-   Discuss findings with employees or persons responsible for creating
      the condition. Invite their comments, suggestions, and aid.

-   Ensure that recommended corrections and changes are transmitted to
      or discussed with the proper supervisor or other person for
      correction.

-   Follow up on changes, corrections, and other actions necessary.

-   Provide a checklist copy to the company health and safety person
      along with a statement of corrective actions taken or still
      required.

Health and Safety Inspection Guidelines

This listing includes items, areas, and categories that may be looked at
during health and safety inspections of the workplace and in the shop.
It is generic and not all-inclusive but provides a guideline of areas to
be surveyed or developed into a checklist for use during the inspection.

-   First aid safety and health equipment

-   Posters, signs required by OSHA and Workers’ Safety, and health and
      safety practices

-   Accident reporting records

-   Employee training provided, such as health and safety talks, worker
      orientation, etc.; records maintained

-   Equipment and tools (e.g., hand, power, welding): condition and use

-   Protective guards and devices: availability, use, proper
      maintenance, and operating condition

-   Housekeeping: maintaining clean work areas, free of trash or debris
      accumulation, tripping, and slipping hazards

-   Lighting: adequacy and safety

-   Sanitation: water and toilets for cleanliness and proper operation

-   Noise: hazards and hearing protection

-   Ventilation: gases, vapors, fumes, and dusts

-   Availability of personal protective equipment: hard hats and head
      protection, respirators, safety belts, life lines, safety shoes,
      eye protection, and gloves

-   Fire protection, prevention, and control, as well as use of fire
      protection equipment

-   Temporary buildings, trailers, sheds

-   Open yard storage

-   Storage of flammable and combustible liquids including service and
      refueling areas for vehicles

-   Temporary heating devices

-   Fall protection requirements: in place and in use

-   Electrical system and devices, condition and use of cords, ground
      fault protection, circuit breaker panels, and receptacles and
      switches

-   Openings: floor, wall, and safety railings

-   Materials: handling equipment and elevators

-   Ladders: condition and use

-   Hazard communication program and Safety Data Sheets (SDS)

-   Stairways: safety railings and condition

-   Scaffolds: safety railings, secured

-   Lock-out/tag-out procedures

-   Machines and equipment: condition and guards in place

-   Forklifts and other vehicles: condition and operation

-   Preventive maintenance program: all inclusive and up-to-date

-   Other items as appropriate

HEALTH AND SAFETY RULES

In order for a health and safety program to be effective, it is vital
that it be understood and implemented at all levels from management to
all employees.

The following are the primary occupational health and safety rules and
regulations applicable to our operations that our company must comply
with. A complete set of standards may be found in the OSHA Rules and
Regulations for General Industry, Part 1910.

General Workplace Safety Rules

The following rules apply at all company facilities and on any jobsite:

-   Report unsafe conditions to your immediate supervisor.

-   Promptly report all accidents, injuries, and incidents to your
      immediate supervisor.

-   Use eye and face protection where there is danger from flying
      objects or particles (such as when grinding, chipping, burning,
      welding, etc.) or from hazardous chemical splashes.

-   Dress properly. Wear appropriate work clothes, gloves, and shoes or
      boots. Loose clothing and jewelry shall not be worn.

-   Operate machines or other equipment only when all guards and safety
      devices are in place and in proper operating condition.

-   Keep all equipment in safe working condition. Never use defective
      tools or equipment. Report any defective tools or equipment to
      your immediate supervisor.

-   Properly care for and be responsible for all personal protective
      equipment (PPE). Wear or use any such PPE when required.

-   Lock-out or tag-out or disconnect the power on any equipment or
      machines before any maintenance, un-jamming, and adjustments are
      made.

-   Do not leave materials in aisles, walkways, stairways, work areas,
      or other points of egress.

-   Practice good housekeeping at all times.

-   Training on equipment is required prior to unsupervised operation.

-   Compliance with all governmental regulations and rules and all
      company safety rules in the following sections is required.

Housekeeping

Proper housekeeping is the foundation for a safe work environment. It
definitely helps prevent accidents and fires, as well as creating a
professional appearance in the work area.

-   All work areas, floors, aisles, and stairways will be kept clean,
      orderly, and free of tripping and slipping hazards. Oils, greases,
      and other liquids will be immediately cleaned up if spilled.

-   Combustible scrap, debris, and garbage shall be removed from the
      work area at frequent and regular intervals.

-   Stairways, walkways, exit doors, the front of electrical panels, or
      access to fire-fighting equipment will be kept clear of storage,
      materials, supplies, trash, and other debris at all times.

-   Overhead storage areas will be marked with the maximum load rating.

Fire Prevention

-   All portable fire extinguishers will be conspicuously located,
      accessible, and maintained in operating condition. Portable fire
      extinguishers will receive an annual service check and a monthly
      visual inspection. These will be documented on the tag on the
      extinguisher or other form.

-   All employees must know the location of fire-fighting equipment in
      the work area and have knowledge of its use and application.

-   Exits will be marked as such by a readily visible sign. Other doors
      likely to be mistaken for an exit will be marked as to their
      character or "Not an Exit.”

-   Only approved safety cans shall be used for handling or storing
      flammable liquids in quantities greater than one gallon. For one
      gallon or less, only the original container or a safety can may be
      used.

-   When heat-producing equipment is used, the work area must be kept
      clear of all fire hazards, and all sources of potential fires will
      be eliminated.

-   Fire extinguishers will be available at all times when utilizing
      heat-producing equipment.

Industrial Hygiene and Occupational Health

-   When no medical facility is reasonably accessible (time and
      distance) to the workplace, a person who has a valid certificate
      of first aid training and first aid supplies will be available at
      the workplace to render first aid.

-   Employees exposed to noise levels above the permissible noise level
      will be included in the hearing conservation program. Hazardous
      noise areas will be posted and appropriate hearing protection will
      be worn in those areas.

-   Employees exposed to harmful gases, fumes, dust, and similar
      airborne hazards will be furnished protection through proper
      ventilation (engineering controls) and personal respiratory
      equipment.

-   Any demolition, renovation, or self-help work will be assessed for
      lead and asbestos exposure, particularly if drywall or any painted
      surfaces or abrasive blasting or grinding is involved.

Personal Protective and Related Equipment

Personal protective equipment must be worn as required for each job in
all operations where there is an exposure to hazardous conditions. This
exposure is determined by a personal protective equipment hazard
assessment of the workplace by the supervisor, as described in Appendix
B. Equipment selection and wearing requirements are determined from this
assessment.

-   Safety glasses, goggles, or face shields will be worn in those areas
      where there is a reasonable probability of injury to the eye from
      flying particles, molten metal, chemicals/acids/caustics, light
      radiation, or other eye hazards.

-   Head protection (hard hats) will be worn for protection from falling
      objects or work near energized electrical contact.

-   Foot protection will be worn where there is danger to the foot from
      falling or rolling objects, objects piercing the sole, or
      electrical hazards.

-   Hand protection is required when hands are exposed to severe cuts or
      abrasions, chemical or thermal burns, or chemical absorption.

-   Appropriate gloves, aprons, goggles, and boots will be used when
      necessary for protection against acids and other chemicals that
      could injure employees.

-   Respiratory equipment in many cases is needed for protection against
      toxic and hazardous fumes and dusts. Supervisors must verify which
      equipment meets the need for breathing safety. Only MSHA- or
      NIOSH-approved equipment will be used.

-   The use of safety harnesses and lanyards are required when working
      more than 10 feet above a floor or ground level and there are no
      guardrails or other form of fall protection, and on certain
      suspended scaffolds. Each employee will be on a separate safety
      line, and this line will be adjusted so that the employee cannot
      fall more than six feet.

Lock-out/Tag-out Program

-   Before any work or maintenance is performed on any machine,
      equipment, tool, or electrical system, it will be made safe by
      removing any source of energy or power to it, such as electrical,
      air or hydraulic pressure, spring or stored energy, or thermal
      (heat or cold).

-   The Lock-out/Tag-out Program provides for a safe method of working
      on, near, or in machinery or equipment that can cause serious
      injury. This program will be used by all employees to ensure that
      the machine or equipment is stopped, isolated from all potentially
      hazardous energy sources, and locked out before employees perform
      any servicing or maintenance where the unexpected energization or
      start-up of the machine or equipment, or the release of stored
      energy, could cause injury.

Electrical

-   Live electrical parts shall be guarded against accidental contact by
      cabinets, enclosures, location, or guarding. Open circuit breaker
      openings or knock-out holes, broken receptacles and switches,
      missing covering plates, etc., will be reported to supervisors for
      repair or replacement.

-   Working and clear space around electric equipment and distribution
      boxes will be kept clear and assessable.

-   Circuit breakers, switch boxes, etc. will be legibly marked to
      indicate their purpose.

-   All extension cords and electric powered tools (except double
      insulated) will be grounded. Ground prongs will not be removed.

-   Electric cords and their strain relief devices will be in good
      condition with no splices.

-   Electric wiring and cords entering or exiting any panel, control, or
      junction box will be secured with clamps or other appropriate
      strain relief device.

-   Extension cords and other flexible cords will not be used in lieu of
      permanent wiring and receptacles. Cords will not be run through
      holes in doors, walls, windows, nor will they be fastened to
      walls, poles, equipment, etc.

-   All lamps below seven feet used for general illumination will have
      the bulbs protected against breakage.

-   All electrical equipment shall be visually inspected prior to each
      use.

Guarding

-   All flywheels, shafting, pulleys, belts, gears, sprockets, chains,
      and fan blades will be guarded or enclosed when located below
      seven feet above the floor or work platform.

-   Guards installed on machinery and equipment, such as air
      compressors, conveyors, drill presses, etc., will not be removed
      during operation. Guards removed for servicing or other work on
      the machine or equipment will be immediately replaced upon
      completion of the work.

-   Woodworking equipment, such as power saws, radial arm saws, table
      saws, or portable abrasive grinders, will not be operated unless
      all required guards are in place. Featherboards and pushboards
      will be used when necessary.

Compressed Gas Cylinders

-   All gas cylinders shall have their contents clearly marked on the
      outside of each cylinder.

-   Cylinders must be transported, stored, and secured in an upright
      position. They will never be left laying on the ground or floor,
      or used as rollers or supports.

-   Cylinder valves must be protected with caps and closed when not in
      use.

-   Oxygen cylinders and fittings will be kept away from oil or grease.
      Oxygen cylinders will be stored at least 20 feet from any fuel gas
      cylinder or separated by a fire barrier at least five feet high.

-   When cylinders are hoisted, they will be secured in a cradle,
      sling-board, or pallet. Valve protection caps will not be used for
      lifting cylinders from one vertical level to another.

Ladders

-   Ladders will be inspected frequently (prior to use each time) to
      identify any unsafe conditions. Those ladders that have developed
      defects will be removed from service and repaired or replaced.
      They will be tagged or marked as such.

-   Portable ladders will be placed as to prevent slipping, or if used
      on other than stable, level, and dry surfaces, will be tied off or
      held. A simple rule for setting up a ladder at the proper angle is
      to place the base from the vertical wall equal to one-fourth the
      working length of the ladder.

-   Portable ladders will extend at least three feet above the upper
      level to which the ladder is used to gain access.

-   The top of a stepladder will not be used as a step.

-   Only one person will be on a ladder at a time.

Flammable and Combustible Liquids

-   Only approved safety cans, original containers, or portable tanks
      will be used to store flammable or combustible liquids.

-   Above ground storage tanks will be separated from each other by a
      minimum of three feet or 1/6 the sum of their diameters. Dikes or
      drainage to prevent accidental discharge from reaching adjoining
      property or waterways will be provided.

-   No more than 25 gallons of Class IA and 120 gallons of Class IB, IC,
      II, or III liquids may be stored outside a storage cabinet or an
      inside storage room.

-   An emergency shut-off switch located 15–75 feet from the pumps and a
      fire extinguisher will be provided at company fuel servicing
      areas.

Cranes and Hoists

-   All cranes and hoists will be inspected prior to each use and during
      use to make sure they are in safe operating condition.

-   A monthly inspection of hooks, running ropes, and hoist chains will
      be made and a certification record to include date, inspector
      signature, and hook, rope, or chain identifier will be maintained.

-   Inspections of frequent (daily or monthly) and periodic (1–12
      months) intervals, depending on severity of use, will be made of
      all cranes. See 1910.179(j) for inspection requirements.

-   The rated load of the crane or hoist will be plainly marked on each
      side of the crane. If the crane has more than one hoisting unit,
      each rating will be marked on the unit or its load block.

-   Loads will never be swung over the heads of workers in the area.

-   Tag lines must be used to control loads and keep workers away.

-   Loads, booms, and rigging will be kept at least 10 feet of energized
      electrical lines rated 50 kV or lower unless the lines are
      de-energized. For lines rated greater than 50 kV follow Safety
      Rules and Regulations, 1910.180(j).

-   Job or shop hooks or other makeshift fasteners using bolts, wire,
      etc. will not be used.

-   All slings will be inspected each day before use. Damaged or
      defective slings will be immediately removed from service. In
      addition, alloy chain slings will receive a thorough inspection
      periodically (at least annually).

-   Alloy steel chain slings, metal mesh slings, and synthetic web
      slings will have permanently affixed identification, markings, or
      coding to show rated capacities.

Welding and Brazing

-   Combustible material will be cleared for a radius of 35 feet from
      the area around cutting or welding operations. If the combustible
      material cannot be cleared or the work cannot be moved, then the
      welding or cutting will not be done.

-   Welding helmets and goggles will be worn for eye protection and to
      prevent flash burns. Eye protection will be worn to guard against
      slag while chipping, grinding, and dressing welds.

-   Welding screens will be used and in proper position to protect
      nearby workers from welding rays.

-   Cables, leads, hoses, and connections will be placed so that they
      present no fire or tripping hazards. Cables will not be wrapped
      around the welder's body.

-   Oxygen cylinders will be stored at least 20 feet from fuel gas
      cylinders, or separated by a noncombustible fire wall with a
      one-half hour rating at least five high.

-   Valve protection caps will be in place on cylinders not in use.

-   Ventilation is a prerequisite for welding in any confined spaces.

-   There shall be no repairs or damaged to the cable within 10 feet of
      the stinger.

Tools

-   Hand tools with broken or cracked handles, mushroomed heads, or
      other defects will not be used. Files will have handles installed.

-   Take special precautions when using power tools. Defective tools
      will be removed from service.

-   Power tools will be turned off and motion stopped before setting
      tools down.

-   Tools will be disconnected from power source before changing drills,
      blades, or bits, or attempting repair or adjustment. Never leave a
      running tool unattended.

-   Power saws, table saws, and radial arm saws will have operational
      blade guards installed and used. Anti-kickback teeth and spreaders
      will be used when rip sawing.

-   Portable abrasive side-winder grinders will have guards installed
      covering the upper and back portions of the abrasive wheel. Wheel
      speed ratings will never be less than the grinder RPM speed.

-   Pedestal grinders will be permanently mounted, tool rests installed
      and adjusted to within 1/8 inch of the wheel, tongue guards
      installed and adjusted to within 1/4 inch of the wheel, and side
      spindle and nut guards installed.

-   Air compressor receivers will be drained frequently to prevent
      buildup of water in the tank.

-   Compressed air will not be used for cleaning purposes except when
      pressure is reduced to less than 30 psi by regulating or use of a
      safety nozzle, and then only with effective chip guarding and
      proper personal protective equipment.

-   Any employee-furnished tools of any nature must meet all OSHA safety
      regulations and ANSI requirements.

Safety Railings and Other Fall Protection

-   All open-sided floors and platforms four feet or more above adjacent
      floor or ground level will be guarded by a standard railing (top
      and mid rail, toe board if required).

-   All stairways of four or more risers will be guarded by a handrail
      or stair rails on the open side. Handrails or stair rails will be
      provided on both sides if the stairs are more than 44 inches wide.

-   When a hole or floor opening is created during a work activity, a
      cover or a barricade must be installed immediately.

-   Safety harnesses, belts, lanyards, lines, and lifelines may be used
      in lieu of other fall protection systems to provide the required
      fall protection.

-   Adjustment of lanyards must provide for not more than a six-foot
      fall, and all tie-off points must be at least waist high.

Scaffolds

-   Scaffold platforms more than 10 feet above the ground, floor, or
      lower level will have standard guardrails (consisting of top rail,
      mid rail, and toe board) installed on all open sides and ends of
      platforms.

-   Planking will be laid tight, overlap at least 12 inches, and extend
      over end supports by 6–12 inches.

-   Mobile scaffolds will be erected no more than a maximum height of
      four times their minimum base dimension.

-   Scaffolds will not be overloaded beyond their design loadings.

Forklifts

-   Only authorized and trained employees will operate forklifts and
      other industrial trucks.

-   Safe speeds, load handling, turning, and other safe driving
      practices will be followed at all times.

-   Operators will ensure loads are stable and secure before moving.

-   Employees will not operate any forklift that is in need of repairs,
      defective, or unsafe. Such forklifts will be removed from service
      for repair.

Aerial Lifts

-   Only trained employees will operate aerial lifts (cherry pickers,
      scissor lifts, extensible and articulating boom platforms).

-   A body belt or harness will be worn and a lanyard attached to the
      boom or basket when working from an aerial lift.

-   Employees will stand firmly on the basket floor, and not sit, stand,
      or climb on the edge of the basket. Planks, ladders, or other
      devices will not be used for additional elevation.

-   Aerial lift trucks will not be moved with workers in an elevated
      basket.

-   Lift controls will be tested each day prior to use.

Excavations and Trenches

-   Any excavation or trench five feet or more in depth (or less than
      five feet and showing potential of cave-in) will be provided
      cave-in protection through shoring, sloping, benching, or the use
      of trench shields. Specific requirements of each system are
      dependent upon the soil classification as determined by a
      competent person.

-   A competent person will inspect each excavation or trench daily
      prior to start of work, after every rainstorm or other hazard
      increasing occurrence, and as needed throughout the shift.

-   Means of egress will be provided in trenches four feet or more in
      depth so as to require no more than 25 feet of lateral travel for
      each employee in the trench.

-   Spoil piles and other equipment will be kept at least two feet from
      the edge of the trench or excavation.

Miscellaneous

-   Only trained employees will service large truck wheels. A cage or
      other restraining device plus an airline assembly consisting of a
      clip-on chuck, gauge, and hose will be used to inflate tires.

-   Any inspection, disassembly, or assembly of vehicle brakes or
      clutches must address the hazard of asbestos exposure. See
      1910.1001, Appendix F, for mandatory guidelines and requirements
      for such work.

OSHA WORKERS' SAFETY—INDIVIDUAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS LISTING

The Occupational Health and Safety Rules and Regulations specify various
individual programs that are applicable to our company. Highlights of
these programs are provided below, and specific written programs or
procedures are incorporated as appendices in this document or are
available separately.

Health and Safety Program—Containing Specific Company Health and Safety Rules

  These rules provide safety guidance for the company and employees to
  follow in the workplace. They cover various requirements in such areas
  as housekeeping, fire prevention, electrical, ladders, scaffolds,
  machine guarding, material handling, etc., that can be encountered in
  the workplace or on the job site.

Hazard Communication Program (Appendix A)

If employees are exposed to or work with hazardous chemicals in the
workplace, this program is required. Important elements of the program
include a master listing of chemicals, safety data sheets for each
chemical, labeling, and training of employees.

Personal Protective Equipment Hazard Assessment (Appendix B)

Employers must assess their workplaces to determine if hazards are
present, or are likely to be present, which necessitate the use of
personal protective equipment (eye, face, head, foot, or hand
protection). This assessment must be documented through a written
certification that identifies the workplace evaluated, the person
certifying that the assessment has been completed, and the dates of the
assessment. It must also identify itself as a certification of hazard
assessment.

Confined Space Entry Program (Appendix C)

If employees enter a confined space that contains or has the potential
to contain an atmospheric or physical hazard, this program is required.
Primary elements of the program are identification of applicable
confined spaces, testing and monitoring, control or elimination of
hazards, protective equipment, specific written entry authorization,
attendants, training, and rescue.

Respiratory Protection Program (Appendix D)

If employees are exposed to hazardous or toxic chemical, paint, or other
gases, vapors, fumes, dusts, or mists above the permissible exposure
limit, or if respirators are worn by employees, this program is
required. Program elements are a written program for the selection,
maintenance, care, and use of respirators; fit testing; training; and
employee physical evaluation for use.

Hearing Conservation Program (Appendix E)

If employees are exposed to noise levels above the permissible noise
exposures, then both protection against the effects of noise through
engineering controls, administrative actions, or personal protective
equipment and an effective hearing conservation program are required.
Program elements would include a written program, identification and
posting of hazardous noise areas, establishment of administrative
actions for exposure control, noise monitoring, hearing evaluations and
follow-on testing, personal protective equipment (hearing protection),
and maintenance of medical records.

Lock-out/Tag-out Program (Appendix F)

If employees service or maintain machines or equipment and the
unexpected energization or start up of the equipment or release of
stored energy could cause injury to the employee, this program is
required. Such forms of hazardous energy include electrical, hydraulic,
pneumatic, heat, or chemical. Program elements include written energy
control procedures delineating specific lock-out/tag-out action for each
machine or piece of equipment, employee training, and periodic
inspections.

Emergency Response Plan (Appendix G)

If employees are engaged in emergency response to a hazardous substance
or chemical release, then an emergency response plan must be developed
and implemented to handle anticipated emergencies. Program elements
include a written response plan, identification and training of
responding employees, medical surveillance and consultation, and
post-response operations.

Fall Protection Plan (Appendix H)

A fall protection plan is needed if any employees work on platforms
(ladders, scaffolding, scissor lifts, etc.) or building surfaces more
than six feet above the floor or ground. Program elements include a
written plan, employee training, and recordkeeping.

Jobsite Fire Prevention Plan (Appendix I)

A jobsite fire prevention plan must be completed for each jobsite. The
plan includes housekeeping, maintenance, training, and program
evaluation.

Injury and Illness Prevention Program (Appendix J)

Employers are required to furnish to employees a workplace that is free
from recognized hazards. An in-depth hazard evaluation or safety
inspection conducted by state agencies, private consultants, insurance
companies, or in-house are means of identifying and eliminating
workplace hazards. An on-going self-inspection program will help ensure
that hazards are identified, eliminated, and controlled.

Powered Industrial Truck (Forklift) Safety Program (Appendix K)

Employers that have forklifts or scissor lifts either at their facility
or on a jobsite must include this program. The program includes
definitions, hazards, as well as training and recordkeeping for all
employees using this equipment.

Spill Prevention and Response Plan (Appendix L)

Employers that use or handle bulk liquid chemicals, which include SPF
chemicals, must include this plan. It includes a program to mitigate
spills and an emergency response plan in the event of a chemical spill.

Asbestos and Lead Hazard Awareness Program (Appendix M)

Asbestos and lead programs, listed below, are but two programs that may
be required due to exposure to hazardous and toxic substances. Employers
must refer to the Rules and Regulations for other substances, such as
benzene, formaldehyde, ethylene oxide, etc., with exposure programs that
may apply to them.

Blood-Borne Pathogens Program (Appendix N)

Employees that administer first aid must be aware of the risks and
hazards from blood-borne pathogens. Elements of this plan include
awareness training, exposure controls, compliance, communication of
hazards to employees, and recordkeeping.

Assured Equipment Grounding Program (Appendix O)

Employees that use any electrical power tools, including hand and shop
power tools, as well as portable generators, must be aware and trained
on how to properly ground these tools to prevent electrical shock.

Silica Exposure Control Program (Appendix P)

Employees that are exposed to airborne silica dust must be aware and
trained on how to properly identify these hazards and protect themselves
against respirable silica dust hazards.

Infections Disease Control Program (Appendix Q)

Employees that are exposed to infectious diseases must be aware and
trained on how to properly identify these hazards and protect themselves
against infection from these diseases in the workplace

APPENDIX A:

HAZARD COMMUNICATION PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.1200

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  COMPANY HAZARD COMMUNICATION POLICY

2.  COMPANY HAZARD COMMUNICATION PROGRAM

    a.  Container Labeling

    b.  Safety Data Sheets (SDS)

    c.  Employee Training and Information

    d.  Hazardous Non-Routine Tasks

    e.  Informing other Employers and Contractors

    f.  List of Hazardous Chemicals

    g.  Chemicals in Unlabeled Pipes

    h.  Program Availability

COMPANY HAZARD COMMUNICATION POLICY 

To ensure that information about the dangers of all hazardous chemicals
used by [Company Name] is known by all affected employees, the following
hazardous information program has been established. Under this program,
you will be informed of the contents of the OSHA Hazard Communications
standard, the hazardous properties of chemicals with which you work,
safe handling procedures, and measures to take to protect yourself from
these chemicals.

COMPANY HAZARD COMMUNICATION PROGRAM

This program applies to all work operations in our company where you may
be exposed to hazardous chemicals under normal working conditions or
during an emergency situation. All work units of this company will
participate in the Hazard Communication Program. Copies of the Hazard
Communication Program are available in the {Location} for review by any
interested employee.

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] is the program coordinator with
overall responsibility for the program, including reviewing and updating
this plan as necessary.

Container Labeling

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] will verify that all containers
received for use will be clearly labeled with product identification,
signal work, hazard statements, precautionary statements, pictograms,
supplier’s information, and supplemental information.

The Project Manager or Master Installer on each jobsite will ensure that
all secondary containers are labeled with either an extra copy of the
original manufacturer's label or with labels marked with the identity
and the appropriate hazard warning. For help with labeling, see the
[Health and Safety Officer Title].

On the following individual stationary process containers, we are using
{describe the labeling system used} rather than a label to convey the
required information:

{List the individual process containers here.}

We are using an in-house labeling system that relies on {describe any
in-house system which uses numbers or graphics to convey hazard
information}.

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] will review the company labeling
procedures every {provide a time period} and will update labels as
required.

Safety Data Sheets (SDS)

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] is responsible for establishing
and monitoring the company SDS program. He or she will ensure that
procedures are developed to obtain the necessary SDSs and will review
incoming SDSs for new or significant health and safety information. He
or she will see that any new information is communicated to affected
employees. The procedure below will be followed when an SDS is not
received at the time of initial shipment:

{Describe the procedure to be followed here.}

Copies of SDSs for all hazardous chemicals to which employees are
exposed or are potentially exposed will be kept in {identify the SDS
locations; include availability on every jobsite—in spray rig}.

SDSs will be readily available to all employees during each work shift.
If an SDS is not available, contact the [Health and Safety Officer
Title], Project Manager, or Master Installer.

SDSs will be readily available to employees in each work area using the
following format:

{Describe the company format here—in a binder, file box, electronic
copy, etc.}

{If an alternative to paper copies of SDSs is used, describe the format
and how employees can access them.}

When revised SDSs are received, the following procedures will be
followed to replace old MSDS:

I.  [Health and Safety Officer Title] will provide copies to all Project
    Managers.

II. Project Managers will provide these copies to every Master
    Installer.

Employee Training and Information

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] is responsible for the Hazard
Communication Program and will ensure that all program elements are
carried out.

Everyone who works with or is potentially exposed to hazardous chemicals
will receive initial training on the hazard communication standard and
this plan before starting work. Each new employee will attend a health
and safety orientation that includes the following information and
training:

-   An overview of the OSHA hazard communication standard

-   The hazardous chemicals present at his or her work area

-   The physical and health risks of the hazardous chemicals

-   Symptoms of overexposure

-   How to determine the presence or release of hazardous chemicals in
      the work area

-   How to reduce or prevent exposure to hazardous chemicals through use
      of control procedures, work practices, and personal protective
      equipment

-   Steps the company has taken to reduce or prevent exposure to
      hazardous chemicals

-   Procedures to follow if employees are overexposed to hazardous
      chemicals

-   How to read labels and SDSs to obtain hazard information

-   Location of the SDS file and written Hazard Communication Program

  For the application of Spray Polyurethane Foam, every employee
  involved in SPF chemical transport or application will take the
  American Chemistry Council’s Center for the Polyurethanes Industry’s
  Spray Polyurethane Foam Chemical Health and Safety Training online
  prior to handling SPF chemicals or within one week of employment. A
  passing score on the accompanying quiz is required, and a certificate
  of completion will be filed under each employee’s record.

  Prior to introducing a new chemical hazard into any section of this
  company, each employee in that section will be given information and
  training as outlined above for the new chemical hazard. The training
  format will be as follows:

-   {Describe the training format, such as audiovisuals, interactive
    computer programs, classroom instruction, etc.}

Hazardous Non-Routine Tasks

Periodically, employees are required to perform non-routine tasks that
are hazardous. Examples of non-routine tasks are confined space entry,
tank cleaning, and painting reactor vessels. Prior to starting work on
such projects, each affected employee will be given information by the
[Health and Safety Officer Title] about the hazardous chemicals he or
she may encounter during such activity. This information will include
specific chemical hazards, protective and safety measures the employee
should use, and steps the company is taking to reduce the hazards,
including ventilation, respirators, the presence of another employee
(buddy systems), and emergency procedures.

Examples of non-routine tasks performed by employees of this company
are:

Task Hazardous Chemical

Informing Other Employers and Contractors

It is the responsibility of the Project Manager to provide other
employers and contractors with information about hazardous chemicals
that their employees may be exposed to on a job site and about suggested
precautions for employees. It is the responsibility of the Project
Manager to obtain information about hazardous chemicals used by other
employers to which employees of this company may be exposed.

Other employers and contractors will be provided with SDSs for hazardous
chemicals generated by this company's operations in the following
manner:

-   By paper copy to their jobsite supervisor with signature receipt

-   By email to their responsible party supervisor with return receipt

-   {Other (describe) ________________________________}

  In addition to providing a copy of an SDS to other employers, other
  employers will be informed of necessary precautionary measures to
  protect employees exposed to operations performed by this company.
  This includes understanding the “Do Not Enter” signage and safety
  tapes installed around active spray zones.

  Also, other employers will be informed of the hazard labels used by
  the company. If symbolic or numerical labeling systems are used, the
  employees of other employers will be provided with information to
  understand the labels used for hazardous chemicals for which they may
  be exposed.

List of Hazardous Chemicals

A list of all known hazardous chemicals used by our employees is
attached to this plan. This list includes the name of the chemical, the
manufacturer, the work area in which the chemical is used, dates of use,
and quantity used. Further information on each chemical may be obtained
from the SDS, located in {identify location}.

When new chemicals are received, this list is updated (including the
date the chemicals were introduced) within 30 days. To ensure any new
chemical is added in a timely manner, the following procedures shall be
followed:

{Identify the procedures to be followed.}

The hazardous chemical inventory is compiled and maintained by the
[Health and Safety Officer Title], {telephone number}.

Chemicals in Unlabeled Pipes

Work activities are sometimes performed by employees in areas where
chemicals are transferred through unlabeled pipes. Prior to starting
work in these areas, the employee shall contact the [Health and Safety
Officer Title] for information regarding:

-   The chemical in the pipes

-   Potential hazards

-   Required safety precautions

  {Include here the chemical list developed during the inventory.
  Arrange this list so that you are able to cross-reference it with your
  SDS file and the labels on your containers. Additional useful
  information, such as the manufacturer's telephone number, an emergency
  number, scientific name, CAS number, and the associated task can be
  included.}

Program Availability

A copy of this program will be made available to employees and their
representatives upon request.

APPENDIX B:

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT HAZARD ASSESSMENT CHECKLIST

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.132

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

Table B1 – Hazard Assessment Checklist

+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Col # | Chart/Table                 | Action                      |
+=======+=============================+=============================+
| 1 & 2 | Personal Protective         | Using this Chart, review    |
|       | Equipment Review            | the first column on the     |
|       |                             | list (Eye and Face          |
|       |                             | Protection). If employees   |
|       |                             | are exposed to any item     |
|       |                             | listed under that heading,  |
|       |                             | enter “Yes” in Column 2.    |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | If the answer is “No,” skip |
|       |                             | this section. Go to the     |
|       |                             | second item on the list     |
|       |                             | (Head Protection). When you |
|       |                             | enter a “Yes” in Column 2,  |
|       |                             | go to the next step.        |
+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 3     | Comment                     | Use this column to enter    |
|       |                             | information you may need,   |
|       |                             | such as the name of the job |
|       |                             | or job task that exposes    |
|       |                             | the employee to a hazard.   |
+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 4     | Source of Hazard            | Enter the source of the     |
|       |                             | hazard (i.e., flying        |
|       |                             | particles, splashing acid,  |
|       |                             | etc.) as an aid to your     |
|       |                             | decision-making process.    |
+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 5     | Hazard Frequency            | Enter how long the job or   |
|       |                             | task lasts—8 hours, 4       |
|       |                             | hours, continuous—in order  |
|       |                             | to determine how long the   |
|       |                             | employee is exposed to the  |
|       |                             | hazard.                     |
+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 6     | Hazard Probability          | Using the Hazard            |
|       |                             | Probability and Severity    |
|       |                             | Chart (next page), enter    |
|       |                             | the alpha character (A, B,  |
|       |                             | C, D) that explains the     |
|       |                             | likelihood of an accident   |
|       |                             | occurring.                  |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | A—Likely to occur           |
|       |                             | immediately or within a     |
|       |                             | short period of time        |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | B—Probably will occur in    |
|       |                             | time                        |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | C—May occur in time         |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | D—Unlikely to occur         |
+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 7     | Hazard Severity             | Using the Hazard            |
|       |                             | Probability and Severity    |
|       |                             | Chart (next page), enter    |
|       |                             | the alpha character (C, M,  |
|       |                             | N) that explains how severe |
|       |                             | the injury would be if it   |
|       |                             | did occur.                  |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | C: CRITICAL—May cause       |
|       |                             | severe injury               |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | M: MARGINAL—May cause minor |
|       |                             | injury                      |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | N: NEGLIGIBLE—Probably      |
|       |                             | would not affect personnel  |
|       |                             | or may cause first aid      |
|       |                             | visit                       |
+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 8     | Hazard Index                | Using the Hazard            |
|       |                             | Probability and Severity    |
|       |                             | Chart (next page), find     |
|       |                             | where the alpha characters  |
|       |                             | intersect in the Index, and |
|       |                             | enter the numeric character |
|       |                             | (1-2-3).                    |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | 1—PPE is required.          |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | 2—PPE is strongly           |
|       |                             | recommended.                |
|       |                             |                             |
|       |                             | 3—PPE may not be necessary. |
+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
| 9     | Appropriate PPE             | Enter in type of PPE that   |
|       |                             | will be provided and used   |
|       |                             | to protect the employee     |
|       |                             | from the hazard if Hazard   |
|       |                             | Index is 1 or 2. The        |
|       |                             | employer must determine     |
|       |                             | whether or not PPE is to be |
|       |                             | used.                       |
+-------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+

___________________________________ ________________________

AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE DATE

Table B2 – Hazard Severity Checklist

+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| PPE Matrix     | Hazard         |                |                |
|                | Severity       |                |                |
+================+================+================+================+
| Hazard         | C—CRITICAL     | M—MARGINAL     | N—NEGLIGIBLE   |
| Probability    |                |                |                |
|                | May cause      | May cause      | Probably would |
|                | severe injury  | minor injury   | not affect     |
|                |                |                |                |
|                |                |                | personnel or   |
|                |                |                | may cause      |
|                |                |                | first aid      |
|                |                |                | visit          |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| A—Likely to    | 1              | 1              | 2              |
| occur          |                |                |                |
| immediately or |                |                |                |
| within a short |                |                |                |
| period of time |                |                |                |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| B—Probably     | 1              | 2              | 2              |
| will occur in  |                |                |                |
| time           |                |                |                |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| C—May occur in | 2              | 2              | 3              |
| time           |                |                |                |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| D—Unlikely to  | 2              | 3              | 3              |
| occur          |                |                |                |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

NOTE: In all cases, engineering modifications are strongly recommended.
Personal protective equipment (PPE) cannot be used in lieu of feasible
engineering controls.

If Hazard Severity Number is:

-   (RED): PPE is REQUIRED

-   (ORANGE): PPE is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED

-   (YELLOW): PPE may not be necessary

___________________________________ ________________________

AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE DATE

Table B3 – PPE Equipment Review Checklist

+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| PER   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| SONAL |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTIVE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| EQUI  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PMENT |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| R     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| EVIEW |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+=======+
| 1     | 2     | 3     | 4     | 5     | 6     | 7     | 8     | 9     |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| ITEM  | Y     | Com   | S     | Freq  | H     | H     | H     | A     |
|       | es/No | ments | ource | uency | azard | azard | azard | pprop |
|       |       | (Job) | of    | of    | P     | Sev   | Index | riate |
|       |       |       | H     | Exp   | robab | erity |       | PPE   |
|       |       |       | azard | osure | ility |       |       |       |
|       |       |       |       | (hr   | (A B  | (C    |       |       |
|       |       |       |       | s/yr) | C D)  | -M-N) |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| FOOT  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTION |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| loyee |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ha    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ndles |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| heavy |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| mat   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| erial |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| works |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| where |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| there |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pote  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ntial |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| exp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| osure |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| foot  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| i     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| njury |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| due   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| fa    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| lling |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ro    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| lling |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| obj   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ects. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| Ha    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| nding |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| 55-g  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| allon |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| drums |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| of    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| SPF   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| chem  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| icals |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pro   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| vides |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pote  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ntial |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| exp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| osure |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| foot  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| jury. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| loyee |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| works |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| where |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| there |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pote  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ntial |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| exp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| osure |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| foot  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| i     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| njury |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| due   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| o     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| bject |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pie   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rcing |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| the   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| sole  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| of    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| the   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| shoe  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| from  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| sharp |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| edges |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| po    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ints. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| This  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| risk  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| typi  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cally |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| found |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| on    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| most  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| co    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| nstru |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ction |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| jobs  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ites. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| wo    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rking |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| where |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| floor |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| sur   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| faces |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| such  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| that  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| they  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| may   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| c     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| reate |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| slip  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ha    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| zard. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| Water |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| and   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| sp    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| illed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| chem  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| icals |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| can   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pr    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| esent |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| this  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| type  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| of    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| slip  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ha    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| zard. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| wo    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rking |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| where |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| there |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| m     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| olten |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| m     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| etal; |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| not   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ty    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| SPF   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| app   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| licat |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ions. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| wo    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rking |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| where |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| they  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| elect |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| w     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ires. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| This  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ty    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| h     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| azard |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| on    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| most  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| co    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| nstru |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ction |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| jobs  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ites. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| work  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| with  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| wet   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| c     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ondit |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ions. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| This  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ty    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| of    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| most  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| co    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| nstru |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ction |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| jobs  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ites. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| work  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| co    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| nstru |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ction |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| demol |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ition |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| reas. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| HAND  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTION |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emplo |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| yee's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| hands |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| chem  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| icals |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| that  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| might |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| irr   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| itate |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| the   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| skin. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| This  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| n     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ormal |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| h     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| azard |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| for   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| SPF   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| app   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| licat |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ions. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emplo |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| yee's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| hands |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| bacte |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| riolo |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| gical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ag    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ents, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| b     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| lood, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| other |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| infec |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| tious |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| mater |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ials. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| This  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| not   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ty    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| for   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| SPF   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ins   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| talla |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| tion. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emplo |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| yee's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| hands |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| treme |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| vibr  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ation |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| from  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| wo    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rking |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| with  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| vibr  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ating |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| t     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ools. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| This  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| c     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ommon |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| with  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| most  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| power |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| t     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ools. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emplo |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| yee's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| hands |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| sharp |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| tools |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ma    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| chine |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| parts |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| that  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| can   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cause |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| i     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| njury |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| (     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| i.e., |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cuts, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| la    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cerat |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ions, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| brasi |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ons). |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emplo |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| yee's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| hands |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| elect |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| w     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ires. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| loyee |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| works |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| mat   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| erial |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| han   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| dling |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| activ |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ities |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| that  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| can   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cause |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| i     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| njury |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| (     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cuts, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| brasi |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ons). |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emplo |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| yee's |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| hands |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| sharp |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| edges |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| spli  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| nters |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| (pun  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cture |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| wou   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| nds). |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| EYE   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| AND   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| FACE  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTION |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| f     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| lying |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| parti |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cles, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| m     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| olten |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| m     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| etal, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| l     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| iquid |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| chemi |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cals, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cids, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ca    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ustic |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| liq   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| uids, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| che   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| mical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| gases |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| va    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pors, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| p     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| otent |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ially |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ha    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rmful |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| light |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| radia |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| tion. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| HEAD  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTION |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| loyee |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| works |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| where |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| there |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pote  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ntial |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| for   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| i     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| njury |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| the   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| head  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| from  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| fa    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| lling |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ob    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ject. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| loyee |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| works |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| near  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| elect |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rical |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| condu |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ctors |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| that  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| could |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| co    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ntact |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| the   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| head. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| The   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emp   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| loyee |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| works |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| where |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| h     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| azard |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| e     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| xists |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| for   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cat   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ching |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| hair. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| FALL  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTION |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| wo    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rking |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| at an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ele   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| vated |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| work  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| area  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| where |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| a     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| slip  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| fall  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| lower |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| level |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| is a  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| pote  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ntial |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ha    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| zard. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| CLO   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| THING |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTION |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ha    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rmful |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| mater |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ials, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| chemi |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cals, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| t     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emper |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ature |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| extr  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| emes, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| so    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| urces |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| of    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cuts, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| la    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cerat |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ions, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| punct |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ures. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| HE    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ARING |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTION |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| sound |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| l     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| evels |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| in    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| e     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| xcess |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| of 85 |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| dBA   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| on an |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| 8     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| -hour |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| TWA.  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| R     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ESPIR |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ATORY |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| PROTE |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| CTION |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| Empl  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oyees |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| are   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ex    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| posed |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| to    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| air   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| con   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| tamin |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ates, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| such  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| as    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| d     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| usts, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| m     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ists, |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| or    |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| f     |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| umes. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| Air   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| monit |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| oring |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| has   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| indi  |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| cated |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| ove   |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| rexpo |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| sure. |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+

___________________________________ ________________________

AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE DATE

APPENDIX C:

CONSTRUCTION CONFINED SPACE

ENTRY PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.146 and 29 CFR 1926.21

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

Purpose

<ENTER COMPANY NAME>

<ENTER COMPANY NAME> employees entering confined spaces must abide by
all aspects of the OSHA requirements and this written confined space
entry program.

Scope

The scope of application of this policy is meant to apply to all
employees, contractors, inspectors, and all other persons entering any
identified confined space at the associated worksite for <ENTER COMPANY
NAME>. No person may enter a permit-required confined space without a
confined space entry permit. Entry into non-permitted confined spaces
can be made as long as the special procedures for entry into that space
are followed. Contractors are responsible for their employees during
work in confined spaces.

Definitions

Roles and Responsibilities

Prevention of Unauthorized Entry

<ENTER COMPANY NAME> will take precautions to prevent unauthorized entry
into confined spaces.

-   The primary means of deterrent will be through locks, signage and/or
    training. An Attendant or stand-by person will prevent unauthorized
    entry during a permit entry event. Appropriate barricades and/or
    barrier tape will be utilized to identify and isolate confined space
    areas.

-   Entry into non-permit required confined spaces shall be controlled
    by the entry employer responsible for the area or work project.

-   When a permit-required confined space must be entered, a permit
    shall be completed and authorized by the entry employer
    representatives prior to entry into the confined space. This permit
    shall serve as certification that the space is safe for entry.

Training

Training is required prior to initial assignment and at least annually
for all confined space Entrants, Attendants, and Entry Supervisors, and
is provided at no cost by <ENTER COMPANY NAME>. The following components
are required to be included in Confined Space Entry training:

1. General Awareness

-   Definition of a confined space

-   Definition of a permit-required confined space

-   Overview of the OSHA regulation

-   Responsibilities of bystanders

2. Permit-Required Confined Space

-   OSHA permit-required confined space standard

-   <ENTER COMPANY NAME> Confined Space Entry Program

-   Hazard recognition and control

-   Communications

-   Personal protective equipment

-   Atmospheric monitoring

-   Safe work practices

-   Work planning and supervision

-   Duties of an Entrant, Attendant, and Entry Supervisor

-   The confined space permit

-   Emergency procedures

-   Confined space rescue

3. Instrumentation

-   Calibration of air monitoring equipment

-   Reading an air monitor display

-   Proper usage of the air monitor

-   Limitations of the air monitor

4. Employee training records will be maintained by <ENTER COMPANY NAME>
with training provided as directed below:

-   Before the employee is assigned any confined space entry duties.

-   Before a change in assigned confined space entry duties.

-   Whenever there is a modification to the confined space entry
    procedures.

-   A review that points to confined space entry inadequacies of
    knowledge or use of procedures.

Reclassifying Permit Spaces to Non-Permit Spaces

Permit-required confined spaces at the <ENTER COMPANY NAME> worksite may
be reclassified as non-permit confined spaces under the following
procedures:

-   If the permit space poses no actual or potential atmospheric hazards
    and if all hazards within the space are eliminated without entry
    into the space, the permit space may be reclassified as a non-permit
    confined space as long as the non-atmospheric hazards remain
    eliminated.

-   <ENTER COMPANY NAME> shall document the basis for determining that
    all hazards in a permit space have been eliminated through a
    certification that includes the date, location of the space, and the
    signature of the person making the determination. The certification
    shall be made available to each employee entering the space or to
    that employee’s authorized representative. This certification form
    can be found in Attachment B.

-   If hazards arise within a permit space that has been reclassified to
    a non-permit space, each employee shall exit the space. <ENTER
    COMPANY NAME> personnel shall then reevaluate the space and
    determine whether it must be reclassified as a permit space.

Equipment

Many different types of safety equipment may be required to safely
perform entries into and rescues from confined spaces. These items must
be supplied, at no charge, to employees engaged in confined space entry
and emergency retrieval. The extent of actual equipment required will
depend on hazards present and the category of the confined space being
entered. Employee training must include hands-on usage of all required
equipment to such an extent that the employees become proficient in
their understanding and use of the equipment, including the following:

-   Ventilation fans

-   Full body harnesses, life lines, rescue rated tripods, and
    mechanical lifting devices

-   Appropriate PPE as required by the hazards present

-   Air monitoring equipment

-   Intrinsically safe portable lighting

-   Communications equipment

-   Lockout/tagout devices

-   Barricade equipment

-   Other safety equipment as required to complete the task

Atmospheric Testing

Air monitoring must be performed by a trained employee prior to entering
any confined space to evaluate potential atmospheric hazards and
determine if acceptable entry conditions exist, to include if a
hazardous condition or oxygen deficiency or enrichment exists. At a
minimum, oxygen, combustible gases, carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulfide
will be monitored.

1. Air Monitoring

Air testing must be completed prior to entry and must be completed in
the following order:

-   Oxygen content – Results greater than or equal to 19.5% and less
    than or equal to 23.5%.

-   Flammable/combustible gas content – Results must indicate less than
    10% of the LEL (lower explosive limit).

-   Toxic gases (carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulfide) – Results must
    indicate hydrogen sulfide concentrations less than 10 ppm and carbon
    monoxide concentrations less than 25 ppm.

-   If the pre-entry air monitoring shows that there is no hazardous
    atmosphere or oxygen deficiency/enrichment in the space, there is no
    reason to believe that there is a chance for onto develop, and other
    potential hazardous conditions have been removed or controlled, the
    space may be safely entered to begin work.

2. Monitoring in a Stratified Atmosphere

-   Atmospheric measurements shall be taken every 4 feet from the top,
    middle and bottom, and every 4 feet in the direction of travel and
    to each side.

-   Different gases accumulate at different levels in a given space. For
    example, methane is lighter than air and will usually be found
    nearer the top of the space, while hydrogen sulfide is heavier than
    air and will typically collect at the bottom of the space.

3. Continuous Air Monitoring

Air quality inside the permit-required confined space must be
continuously monitored due to the potential for changing atmospheric
conditions. These results are to be recorded on the entry permit. To
meet this requirement, a four-gas meter is used to continuously monitor
the atmosphere inside the space. The preceding shall be completed using
one of the following methods:

-   Place the monitor inside with the Entrant.

-   Place the monitor inside and set up a remote alarm outside with the
    Attendant.

-   Set up the remote sampling tube with the Entrant and place the
    monitor outside with the Attendant.

4. Calibrating and Maintaining Air Monitoring Equipment

-   All monitoring equipment must be properly calibrated and maintained
    in good working condition.

-   All calibrations shall be completed according to the manufacturer’s
    specifications.

-   Calibration logs for each instrument shall be kept up to date and
    inspected regularly to ensure accuracy.

 Hazard Elimination and Control

The Entry Supervisor will identify all potential hazards concerning the
permit-required confined space. Each hazard will be eliminated or
controlled. Hazards may exist in any of the following categories:

1. Atmospheric Hazards/Ventilation

Fresh air ventilation is the first option for correcting an atmospheric
hazard.

-   Force fresh air into the space.

-   Get airflow to bottom of the space.

-   Use continuously.

2. Contents and Residues

Contents should be removed from the space when possible. Entrants must
assume that residues may be present and protect themselves from contact
with harmful materials.

-   Remove contents

-   Clean and isolate space.

-   Wear appropriate PPE to protect against contact with materials.

3. Potential Energy

Potential energy sources must be secured. They include:

-   Electrical equipment and circuits.

-   Hydraulic equipment and systems.

-   Pneumatic equipment and systems.

-   Mechanical equipment and systems.

-   Thermal energy equipment and systems.

4. Environment in the Space

Entrants will need to address any safety issues, including the
following:

-   Slippery surfaces

-   Extreme temperatures

5. Configuration of the Space

The configuration of the space can make safe operations more difficult.
Use particular care when any of the following are present:

-   Unusual shape or slope

-   Low overhead clearance

-   Drop-offs in floors

-   Complex layout

6. External Hazards

-   External hazards such as vehicle traffic, machinery, equipment, and
    processes may increase the hazards of the confined space entry.

-   External hazards must be controlled prior to entering the confined
    space.

Confined Space Entry Procedures

When entry into a confined space is necessary, the supervisor shall
initiate entry procedures, including the completion of the entry permit
or reclassification of the permit-required space to a non-permit space.
Entry into a confined space shall follow the standard entry procedures
below:

1. Entry into a Permit-Required Confined Space

-   The Entry Supervisor physically inspects the space if the entry is
    at that time a “Permit-Required,” “Alternate Procedure,” or
    “Non-Permit” entry. Entry Supervisor then completes all items on the
    Confined Space Entry Permit.

-   Entry Supervisor retains a copy of the Entry Permit, and posts the
    Entry Permit at the entry site.

-   At least one Attendant externally monitors the permit-required
    confined space being entered for the duration of the entry
    operation.

-   Attendants and Entrants maintain rescue equipment and any other
    equipment as specified on the permit.

-   Attendant verifies acceptable entry conditions by identifying and
    controlling or eliminating any hazards, and by testing the
    atmosphere with a four-gas meter at 4-foot intervals.

-   Attendant directs the Entrant(s) to enter and exit the space, and
    conducts periodic checks of hazard controls.

-   Attendant orders immediate evacuation of the space if safety
    equipment fails or if the space becomes, or has the potential to
    become, immediately hazardous. If necessary, the Attendant summons
    emergency responders, but NEVER ENTERS the space.

-   When the confined space operation is complete, the Entry Supervisor
    accounts for all Entrants, ensures that the space is secured, and
    terminates the entry by initialing the Entry Permit.

-   Submit terminated permit to the entry employer.

2. Entry into a Permit-Required Confined Space Using Alternate Procedures

-   This Alternate Entry Procedure may be used if the only hazard
    present in the confined space is (as determined by the Entry
    Supervisor):

    -   Atmospheric in nature, and

    -   The atmospheric hazard can be controlled by mechanical
        ventilation alone, and

    -   The permit-required confined space will not become immediately
        dangerous to life and health (IDLH) if the mechanical
        ventilation fails.

-   After evaluating the permit-required confined space and establishing
    appropriate atmospheric controls, the Entry Supervisor may classify
    the permit space as an alternate entry confined space by completing
    the appropriate sections on the Entry Permit.

-   Entry Supervisor submits a copy of the permit to the entry company
    and posts the permit at the entry site.

-   The Entrant may enter the confined space without the assistance or
    use of an Attendant, following the procedure below. When entering
    the alternate entry confined space, the Entrant will:

    -   Establish and ensure that the mechanical ventilation system is
        operational and providing clean, fresh air to the Entrant’s work
        location within the space during the entire entry.

    -   Test the atmosphere of the permit-required space prior to entry
        into the space.

    -   Use and continually operate a gas detector during the entire
        confined space operation.

    -   Immediately evacuate the space if ventilation fails, or if the
        portable air sampling equipment fails or enters alarm mode.

-   Immediately evacuate the space if you discover, or become aware of a
    previously unrecognized hazard. If this occurs, immediately notify
    the Entry Supervisor. The Entry Supervisor shall re-evaluate the
    permit-required space and implements appropriate safety precautions
    prior to resuming the confined space operation.

-   All steps taken to reclassify the permit-required space to an
    alternate entry space must be written on the Entry Permit.

3. Entry into a Non-Permit Confined Space

-   If there are no inherent hazards associated with the space, or if
    all inherent hazards have been eliminated (not just controlled but
    eliminated), the space may be classified as a non-permit confined
    space, and entered using the following guidelines. When entering the
    non-permit confined space, the Entrant will:

    -   Survey the surrounding area before entry for potential hazards
        and sources of drifting vapors and gases.

    -   Always test the non-permit confined space with a four-gas meter
        before entry, and document pre-entry tests.

    -   Follow <ENTER COMPANY NAME> safety rules and use generally
        acceptable safe work practices when entering and working in
        non-permit confined spaces.

    -   Never use paints, thinners, chemicals, or weld or create any
        other atmospheric hazard while working in a non-permit confined
        space.

    -   Never introduce any other atmospheric, mechanical, engulfing, or
        electrical hazard into the space.

-   No Attendant or arrangement for rescue service is necessary when
    workers into non-permit confined spaces.

-   All steps taken to reclassify a permit-required confined space to a
    non-permit confined space must be written on the Entry Permit.

4. Emergency Rescue Procedures

Non-Entry Rescue

-   Retrieval systems are required whenever an authorized Entrant enters
    a permit-required space.

-   Each authorized Entrant shall use a full-body harness, with a
    retrieval line attached at the center of the Entrant’s back near
    shoulder level.

-   The other end of the retrieval lie shall be attached to a mechanical
    device or fixed point outside the permit-required space in such a
    manner that rescue can begin as soon as the rescuer becomes aware
    that rescue is necessary.

-   A mechanical device shall be available to retrieve personnel from
    vertical type permit-required spaces more than 5 feet deep.

Entry Rescue

-   In the event of any emergency situation requiring rescue from a
    confined space, <ENTER COMPANY NAME> employees shall not attempt to
    enter the space to perform a rescue. The Attendant on duty shall
    immediately implement the predetermined emergency rescue system, and
    contact <ENTER RESCUE ENTITY NAME>.

-   Rescue services that can be performed safely from outside the
    confined space (e.g. hoisting a harnessed Entrant) shall be
    undertaken. Other Entrants in the space shall immediately exit the
    space and only provide assistance that does not endanger them.

-   <ENTER RESCUE ENTITY NAME> is the primary emergency rescue service
    associated with <ENTER COMPANY NAME> confined space entries.

Procedure Review

This procedure will be reviewed at least annually by <ENTER COMPANY
NAME> and revised as necessary.

Recordkeeping

Records shall be maintained indefinitely.

1. Confined Space Inventory

-   <ENTER COMPANY NAME> shall maintain an updated inventory of all
    permit-required and non-permit confined spaces.

2. Confined Space Training

-   <ENTER COMPANY NAME> shall provide and document training for all
    employees with duties relating to confined space entry. Any
    refresher training or retraining shall be documented by Entrant
    supervisors and forwarded to <ENTER COMPANY NAME>.

3. Confined Space Permit

-   Each permit for confined space entry shall be maintained by the
    Entry Supervisor’s company, and copies of all permits shall be
    forwarded to <ENTER COMPANY NAME> for filing.

Attachment A

Confined Space Entry Permit

Attachment B

Reclassification Form

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  INTRODUCTION

    a.  Statement of Need

    b.  Scope

    c.  Anticipated Benefits

    d.  Administration

    e.  Location of the Written Program

    f.  Notice

2.  PURPOSE

3.  AUTHORITY

4.  SUMMARY

5.  DEFINITIONS

6.  RESPONSIBILITIES

    a.  Host Employer

    b.  Controlling Contractor

    c.  Entry Employer

    d.  Employees

    e.  Entry Supervisor

    f.  Entry Attendant

    g.  Authorized Entrant

7.  PREVENTION OF UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY

8.  TRAINING

    a.  General Awareness

    b.  Permit Required Confined Space

    c.  Instrumentation

    d.  Employee Training Records

9.  RECLASSIFYING PERMIT SPACES TO NON-PERMIT SPACES

10. EQUIPMENT

11. ATMOSPHERIC TESTING

    a.  Air Monitoring

    b.  Monitoring in a Stratified Atmosphere

    c.  Continuous Air Monitoring

    d.  Calibrating and Maintaining Air Monitoring Equipment

12. HAZARD ELIMINATION AND CONTROL

    a.  Atmospheric Hazards/Ventilation

    b.  Contents and Residues

    c.  Potential Energy

    d.  Environment in the Space

    e.  Configuration of the Space

    f.  External Hazards

13. CONFINED SPACE ENTRY PROCEDURES

    a.  Entry into Permit-Required Confined Space

    b.  Entry into Permit-Required Confined Space Using Alternate
        Procedures

    c.  Entry into Non-Permit Space

    d.  Emergency Response Procedures

14. PROCEDURE REVIEW

15. RECORDKEEPING

    a.  Confined Space Inventory

    b.  Confined Space Training

    c.  Confined Space Permit

ATTACHMENT C.1.—DEFINITIONS

ATTACHMENT C.2.—ATMOSPHERIC TESTING AND MONITORING

ATTACHMENT C.3.—VENTILATION OF CONFINED SPACES

ATTACHMENT C.4.—BASIC CONFINED SPACE ENTRY AND RESCUE EQUIPMENT

ATTACHMENT C.5.—EMPLOYEE DUTIES

ATTACHMENT C.6.—CONFINED SPACE ENTRY PROCEDURES

INTRODUCTION

a.  Statement of Need

  [Company Name] is committed to providing a safe and healthful work
  environment for the entire staff. In pursuit of this endeavor, the
  following written program is in place to identify all confined spaces
  and to eliminate or control any hazards associated with entry into
  these spaces.

  The purpose of this Confined Space Entry Program is to set procedures
  and policies that will ensure workers safe entry into confined spaces
  and permit-required confined spaces to perform tasks. This procedure
  is designed to provide the minimum safety requirements in accordance
  with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s (OSHA)
  standard found at 29 CFR 1926.1200. This objective is met by:

-   The survey, inspection and evaluation of the workplace to determine
      if any spaces are permit-required confined spaces.

-   Posting appropriate signage and providing training to individuals so
      that they recognize and will not enter permit-required confined
      spaces unless authorized.

-   Training individuals who will enter permit-required confined spaces.

-   Developing written entry practices and procedures.

  [Company Name] must comply with the {state regulations} Confined
  Spaces Standard and Federal OSHA 29 CFR 1910.146 where appropriate.
  Additionally, this program will assist [Company Name] in achieving the
  overall goal of a safer work place.

b.  Scope

  The scope of application of this policy is meant to apply to all
  employees, contractors, inspectors, and all other persons entering any
  identified confined space at the associated worksite for [Company
  Name] . No person may enter a permit-required confined space without a
  confined space entry permit. Entry into non-permitted confined spaces
  can be made as long as the special procedures for entry into that
  space are followed. Contractors are responsible for their employees
  during work in confined spaces.

c.  Anticipated Benefits

  Several benefits are anticipated with the implementation of the
  Confined Space Entry Program:

-   Prevention of illnesses and injuries related to entry or work in
      permit-required confined spaces

-   Overall improvement of the company’s Safety Program

-   Improvement of employer-employee relations by establishing regular
      lines of communication

-   Avoidance of citations, violations, and related problems from the
      Federal and state regulations

d.  Administration

  The Confined Space Entry Program administrator is the company’s
  [Health and Safety Officer Title].

e.  Location of The Written Program

  A copy of this written confined space entry program is available, upon
  request, to employees, their designated representatives, and directors
  or designees of the Federal Occupational Health and Safety
  Administration (OSHA). A copy of this written confined space entry
  program will be kept at: [Company Name] {Street Address}.

f.  Notice

  Employees and contractors of [Company Name] shall not enter a confined
  space until the following requirements are met:

-   Hazards are identified and evaluated.

-   Workers entering the space are trained on confined space hazards and
      entry procedures.

-   Workers entering the space are identified and made aware of possible
      hazards that may be encountered on that particular job.

-   Appropriate danger signs have been posted.

-   Proper personal protective equipment has been selected and issued to
      affected employees.

  If a confined space is not entered because one of the conditions
  mentioned above has not been met, the confined space will be
  restricted to employees and others by erecting barriers, installing
  locks, and posting warning signs until requirements have been met.

PURPOSE

  The purpose of this program is to ensure the protection of all
  employees of [Company Name] from the hazards associated with confined
  space entry. This document contains requirements for practices and
  procedures to protect employees from those hazards of entry into
  permit-required confined spaces.

  It shall be the policy of [Company Name] to reduce the need for
  confined space entry. It shall also be the policy of [Company Name] to
  eliminate, whenever possible, all confined space hazards in order to
  reclassify permit-required confined spaces to non-permit-required
  confined spaces. When confined space entry is necessary, all
  provisions of this document are to be followed.

AUTHORITY

  The [Company Name] Confined Space Entry Program is required by federal
  and state regulations.

SUMMARY

  [Company Name] has the responsibility to establish a written,
  comprehensive program that includes provisions for working in confined
  spaces. These provisions entail preventing unauthorized entries,
  identifying and evaluating hazards, establishing procedures for safe
  permit space entry, issuing and maintaining proper equipment, using
  outside attendants, establishing rescue and emergency procedures,
  identifying duties and job classifications of employees entering or
  working in confined spaces, establishing a system for issuing entry
  permits, developing post-entry procedures, and conducting post-illness
  and injury reviews.

  The written plan will be reviewed annually in {month} for accuracy and
  completeness. The written plan and its elements will be updated in the
  following situations:

-   When there is reason to believe that provisions of the program may
      not protect employees

-   When new processes or technologies are introduced

-   When job duties mentioned in the program are changed

-   When locations mentioned in the program are changed

-   When requirements for written confined space entry programs have
      changed in accordance with applicable standards, codes, and
      regulations

-   When any other elements are changed

DEFINITIONS 

  The following table defines key terminology used in this program. It
  includes all abbreviations and acronyms, and any words or phrases that
  have a special meaning in the context of this program.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Term                             | Definition                       |
+==================================+==================================+
| Acceptable Entry Conditions      | The conditions that must exist   |
|                                  | in a permit space, before an     |
|                                  | employee may enter that space,   |
|                                  | to ensure that employees can     |
|                                  | safely enter into, and safely    |
|                                  | work within, that space.         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Attendant                        | An individual stationed outside  |
|                                  | one or more permit spaces who    |
|                                  | assesses the status of           |
|                                  | authorized entrants and who must |
|                                  | perform the duties specified in  |
|                                  | §1926.1209.                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Authorized Entrant               | An employee who is authorized by |
|                                  | the entry supervisor to enter a  |
|                                  | permit space.                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Barrier                          | A physical obstruction that      |
|                                  | blocks or limits access.         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Blanking or Blinding             | The absolute closure of a pipe,  |
|                                  | line, or duct by the fastening   |
|                                  | of a solid plate (such as a      |
|                                  | spectacle blind or a skillet     |
|                                  | blind) that completely covers    |
|                                  | the bore and that is capable of  |
|                                  | withstanding the maximum         |
|                                  | pressure of the pipe, line, or   |
|                                  | duct with no leakage beyond the  |
|                                  | plate.                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Competent Person                 | One who is capable of            |
|                                  | identifying existing and         |
|                                  | predictable hazards in the       |
|                                  | surroundings or working          |
|                                  | conditions which are unsanitary, |
|                                  | hazardous, or dangerous to       |
|                                  | employees, and who has the       |
|                                  | authorization to take prompt     |
|                                  | corrective measures to eliminate |
|                                  | them.                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Confined Space                   | A space that:                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (1) Is large enough and so       |
|                                  | configured that an employee can  |
|                                  | bodily enter it;                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (2) Has limited or restricted    |
|                                  | means for entry and exit; and    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (3) Is not designed for          |
|                                  | continuous employee occupancy.   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Control                          | The action taken to reduce the   |
|                                  | level of any hazard inside a     |
|                                  | confined space using engineering |
|                                  | methods (for example, by         |
|                                  | ventilation), and then using     |
|                                  | these methods to maintain the    |
|                                  | reduced hazard level. Control    |
|                                  | also refers to the engineering   |
|                                  | methods used for this purpose.   |
|                                  | Personal protective equipment is |
|                                  | not a control.                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Controlling Contractor           | The employer that has overall    |
|                                  | responsibility for construction  |
|                                  | at the worksite.                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Note. If the controlling         |
|                                  | contractor owns or manages the   |
|                                  | property, then it is both a      |
|                                  | controlling employer and a host  |
|                                  | employer.                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Double Block and Bleed           | The closure of a line, duct, or  |
|                                  | pipe by closing and locking or   |
|                                  | tagging two in-line valves and   |
|                                  | by opening and locking or        |
|                                  | tagging a drain or vent valve in |
|                                  | the line between the two closed  |
|                                  | valves.                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Early Warning System             | The method used to alert         |
|                                  | authorized entrants and          |
|                                  | attendants that an engulfment    |
|                                  | hazard may be developing.        |
|                                  | Examples of early-warning        |
|                                  | systems include, but are not     |
|                                  | limited to: alarms activated by  |
|                                  | remote sensors; and lookouts     |
|                                  | with equipment for immediately   |
|                                  | communicating with the           |
|                                  | authorized entrants and          |
|                                  | attendants.                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Emergency                        | Any occurrence (including any    |
|                                  | failure of power, hazard control |
|                                  | or monitoring equipment) or      |
|                                  | event, internal or external, to  |
|                                  | the permit space that could      |
|                                  | endanger entrants.               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Engulfment                       | The surrounding and effective    |
|                                  | capture of a person by a liquid  |
|                                  | or finely divided (flowable)     |
|                                  | solid substance that can be      |
|                                  | aspirated to cause death by      |
|                                  | filling or plugging the          |
|                                  | respiratory system or that can   |
|                                  | exert enough force on the body   |
|                                  | to cause death by strangulation, |
|                                  | constriction, crushing, or       |
|                                  | suffocation.                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Entry                            | The action by which any part of  |
|                                  | a person passes through an       |
|                                  | opening into a permit-required   |
|                                  | confined space. Entry includes   |
|                                  | ensuing work activities in that  |
|                                  | space and is considered to have  |
|                                  | occurred as soon as any part of  |
|                                  | the entrant’s body breaks the    |
|                                  | plane of an opening into the     |
|                                  | space, whether or not such       |
|                                  | action is intentional or any     |
|                                  | work activities are actually     |
|                                  | performed in the space.          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Entry Employer                   | Any employer who decides that an |
|                                  | employee it directs will enter a |
|                                  | permit space.                    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Note. An employer cannot avoid   |
|                                  | the duties of the standard       |
|                                  | merely by refusing to decide     |
|                                  | whether its employees will enter |
|                                  | a permit space, and OSHA will    |
|                                  | consider the failure to so       |
|                                  | decide to be an implicit         |
|                                  | decision to allow employees to   |
|                                  | enter those spaces if they are   |
|                                  | working in the proximity of the  |
|                                  | space.                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Entry Permit                     | The written or printed document  |
|                                  | that is provided by the employer |
|                                  | who designated the space a       |
|                                  | permit space to allow and        |
|                                  | control entry into a permit      |
|                                  | space and that contains the      |
|                                  | information specified in         |
|                                  | §1926.1206 of this standard.     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Entry Rescue                     | Occurs when a rescue service     |
|                                  | enters a permit space to rescue  |
|                                  | one or more employees.           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Entry Supervisor                 | The qualified person (such as    |
|                                  | the employer, foreman, or crew   |
|                                  | chief) responsible for           |
|                                  | determining if acceptable entry  |
|                                  | conditions are present at a      |
|                                  | permit space where entry is      |
|                                  | planned, for authorizing entry   |
|                                  | and overseeing entry operations, |
|                                  | and for terminating entry as     |
|                                  | required by this standard.       |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Note. An entry supervisor also   |
|                                  | may serve as an attendant or as  |
|                                  | an authorized entrant, as long   |
|                                  | as that person is trained and    |
|                                  | equipped as required by this     |
|                                  | standard for each role he or she |
|                                  | fills. Also, the duties of entry |
|                                  | supervisor may be passed from    |
|                                  | one individual to another during |
|                                  | the course of an entry           |
|                                  | operation.                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Hazard                           | A physical hazard or hazardous   |
|                                  | atmosphere. See definitions      |
|                                  | below.                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Hazardous Atmosphere             | An atmosphere that may expose    |
|                                  | employees to the risk of death,  |
|                                  | incapacitation, impairment of    |
|                                  | ability to self-rescue (that is, |
|                                  | escape unaided from a permit     |
|                                  | space), injury, or acute illness |
|                                  | from one or more of the          |
|                                  | following causes:                |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (1) Flammable gas, vapor, or     |
|                                  | mist in excess of 10 percent of  |
|                                  | its lower flammable limit (LFL); |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (2) Airborne combustible dust at |
|                                  | a concentration that meets or    |
|                                  | exceeds its LFL; Note: This      |
|                                  | concentration may be             |
|                                  | approximated as a condition in   |
|                                  | which the combustible dust       |
|                                  | obscures vision at a distance of |
|                                  | 5 feet (1.52 meters) or less.    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (3) Atmospheric oxygen           |
|                                  | concentration below 19.5 percent |
|                                  | or above 23.5 percent;           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (4) Atmospheric concentration of |
|                                  | any substance for which a dose   |
|                                  | or a permissible exposure limit  |
|                                  | is published in Subpart          |
|                                  | D—Occupational Health and        |
|                                  | Environmental Control, or in     |
|                                  | Subpart Z—Toxic and Hazardous    |
|                                  | Substances, of this part and     |
|                                  | which could result in employee   |
|                                  | exposure in excess of its dose   |
|                                  | or permissible exposure limit;   |
|                                  | Note. An atmospheric             |
|                                  | concentration of any substance   |
|                                  | that is not capable of causing   |
|                                  | death, incapacitation,           |
|                                  | impairment of ability to         |
|                                  | self-rescue, injury, or acute    |
|                                  | illness due to its health        |
|                                  | effects is not covered by this   |
|                                  | definition.                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (5) Any other atmospheric        |
|                                  | condition that is immediately    |
|                                  | dangerous to life or health.     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Note. For air contaminants for   |
|                                  | which OSHA has not determined a  |
|                                  | dose or permissible exposure     |
|                                  | limit, other sources of          |
|                                  | information, such as Safety Data |
|                                  | Sheets that comply with the      |
|                                  | Hazard Communication Standard,   |
|                                  | §1926.59 of this part, published |
|                                  | information, and internal        |
|                                  | documents can provide guidance   |
|                                  | in establishing acceptable       |
|                                  | atmospheric conditions.          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Host Employer                    | The employer that owns or        |
|                                  | manages the property where the   |
|                                  | construction work is taking      |
|                                  | place.                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Note. If the owner of the        |
|                                  | property on which the            |
|                                  | construction activity occurs has |
|                                  | contracted with an entity for    |
|                                  | the general management of that   |
|                                  | property, and has transferred to |
|                                  | that entity the information      |
|                                  | specified in §1203(h)(1), OSHA   |
|                                  | will treat the contracted        |
|                                  | management entity as the host    |
|                                  | employer for as long as that     |
|                                  | entity manages the property.     |
|                                  | Otherwise, OSHA will treat the   |
|                                  | owner of the property as the     |
|                                  | host employer. In no case will   |
|                                  | there be more than one host      |
|                                  | employer.                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Hot Work                         | Operations capable of providing  |
|                                  | a source of ignition (for        |
|                                  | example, riveting, welding,      |
|                                  | cutting, burning, and heating).  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Immediately Dangerous to Life or | Any condition that would         |
| Health (IDLH)                    | interfere with an individual’s   |
|                                  | ability to escape unaided from a |
|                                  | permit space and that poses a    |
|                                  | threat to life or that would     |
|                                  | cause irreversible adverse       |
|                                  | health effects.                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Note. Some materials—hydrogen    |
|                                  | fluoride gas and cadmium vapor,  |
|                                  | for example—may produce          |
|                                  | immediate transient effects      |
|                                  | that, even if severe, may pass   |
|                                  | without medical attention, but   |
|                                  | are followed by sudden, possibly |
|                                  | fatal collapse 12-72 hours after |
|                                  | exposure. The victim "feels      |
|                                  | normal" after recovery from      |
|                                  | transient effects until          |
|                                  | collapse. Such materials in      |
|                                  | hazardous quantities are         |
|                                  | considered to be “immediately”   |
|                                  | dangerous to life or health.     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Inerting                         | Displacing the atmosphere in a   |
|                                  | permit space by a noncombustible |
|                                  | gas (such as nitrogen) to such   |
|                                  | an extent that the resulting     |
|                                  | atmosphere is noncombustible.    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Note. This procedure produces an |
|                                  | IDLH oxygen-deficient            |
|                                  | atmosphere.                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Isolate or Isolation             | The process by which employees   |
|                                  | in a confined space are          |
|                                  | completely protected against the |
|                                  | release of energy and material   |
|                                  | into the space, and contact with |
|                                  | a physical hazard, by such means |
|                                  | as: blanking or blinding;        |
|                                  | misaligning or removing sections |
|                                  | of lines, pipes, or ducts; a     |
|                                  | double block and bleed system;   |
|                                  | lockout or tagout of all sources |
|                                  | of energy; blocking or           |
|                                  | disconnecting all mechanical     |
|                                  | linkages; or placement of        |
|                                  | barriers to eliminate the        |
|                                  | potential for employee contact   |
|                                  | with a physical hazard.          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Limited or Restricted Means for  | A condition that has a potential |
| Entry or Exit                    | to impede an employee’s movement |
|                                  | into or out of a confined space. |
|                                  | Such conditions include, but are |
|                                  | not limited to, trip hazards,    |
|                                  | poor illumination, slippery      |
|                                  | floors, inclining surfaces and   |
|                                  | ladders.                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Line Breaking                    | The intentional opening of a     |
|                                  | pipe, line, or duct that is or   |
|                                  | has been carrying flammable,     |
|                                  | corrosive, or toxic material, an |
|                                  | inert gas, or any fluid at a     |
|                                  | volume, pressure, or temperature |
|                                  | capable of causing injury.       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Lockout                          | The placement of a lockout       |
|                                  | device on an energy isolating    |
|                                  | device, in accordance with an    |
|                                  | established procedure, ensuring  |
|                                  | that the energy isolating device |
|                                  | and the equipment being          |
|                                  | controlled cannot be operated    |
|                                  | until the lockout device is      |
|                                  | removed.                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Lower Flammable Limit or Lower   | The minimum concentration of a   |
| Explosive Limit                  | substance in air needed for an   |
|                                  | ignition source to cause a flame |
|                                  | or explosion.                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Monitor or Monitoring            | The process used to identify and |
|                                  | evaluate the hazards after an    |
|                                  | authorized entrant enters the    |
|                                  | space. This is a process of      |
|                                  | checking for changes that is     |
|                                  | performed in a periodic or       |
|                                  | continuous manner after the      |
|                                  | completion of the initial        |
|                                  | testing or evaluation of that    |
|                                  | space.                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Non-Entry Rescue                 | Occurs when a rescue service,    |
|                                  | usually the attendant, retrieves |
|                                  | employees in a permit space      |
|                                  | without entering the permit      |
|                                  | space.                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Non-Permit Confined Space        | A confined space that meets the  |
|                                  | definition of a confined space   |
|                                  | but does not meet the            |
|                                  | requirements for a               |
|                                  | permit-required confined space,  |
|                                  | as defined in this subpart.      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Oxygen Deficient Atmosphere      | An atmosphere containing less    |
|                                  | than 19.5 percent oxygen by      |
|                                  | volume.                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Oxygen Enriched Atmosphere       | An atmosphere containing more    |
|                                  | than 23.5 percent oxygen by      |
|                                  | volume.                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Permit-Required Confined Space   | A confined space that has one or |
|                                  | more of the following            |
|                                  | characteristics:                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (1) Contains or has a potential  |
|                                  | to contain a hazardous           |
|                                  | atmosphere;                      |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (2) Contains a material that has |
|                                  | the potential for engulfing an   |
|                                  | entrant;                         |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (3) Has an internal              |
|                                  | configuration such that an       |
|                                  | entrant could be trapped or      |
|                                  | asphyxiated by inwardly          |
|                                  | converging walls or by a floor   |
|                                  | which slopes downward and tapers |
|                                  | to a smaller cross-section; or   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (4) Contains any other           |
|                                  | recognized serious safety or     |
|                                  | health hazard.                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Permit-Required Confined Space   | The employer’s overall program   |
| Program                          | for controlling, and, where      |
|                                  | appropriate, for protecting      |
|                                  | employees from, permit space     |
|                                  | hazards and for regulating       |
|                                  | employee entry into permit       |
|                                  | spaces.                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Physical Hazard                  | An existing or potential hazard  |
|                                  | that can cause death or serious  |
|                                  | physical damage. Examples        |
|                                  | include, but are not limited to: |
|                                  | explosives (as defined by 7      |
|                                  | paragraph (n) of §1926.914,      |
|                                  | definition of “explosive”);      |
|                                  | mechanical, electrical,          |
|                                  | hydraulic and pneumatic energy;  |
|                                  | radiation; temperature extremes; |
|                                  | engulfment; noise; and inwardly  |
|                                  | converging surfaces. Physical    |
|                                  | hazard also includes chemicals   |
|                                  | that can cause death or serious  |
|                                  | physical damage through skin or  |
|                                  | eye contact (rather than through |
|                                  | inhalation).                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Prohibited Condition             | Any condition in a permit space  |
|                                  | that is not allowed by the       |
|                                  | permit during the period when    |
|                                  | entry is authorized. A hazardous |
|                                  | atmosphere is a prohibited       |
|                                  | condition unless the employer    |
|                                  | can demonstrate that personal    |
|                                  | protective equipment (PPE) will  |
|                                  | provide effective protection for |
|                                  | each employee in the permit      |
|                                  | space and provides the           |
|                                  | appropriate PPE to each          |
|                                  | employee.                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Qualified Person                 | One who, by possession of a      |
|                                  | recognized degree, certificate,  |
|                                  | or professional standing, or who |
|                                  | by extensive knowledge,          |
|                                  | training, and experience, has    |
|                                  | successfully demonstrated his    |
|                                  | ability to solve or resolve      |
|                                  | problems relating to the subject |
|                                  | matter, the work, or the         |
|                                  | project.                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Representative Permit Space      | A mock-up of a confined space    |
|                                  | that has entrance openings that  |
|                                  | are similar to, and is of        |
|                                  | similar size, configuration, and |
|                                  | accessibility to, the permit     |
|                                  | space that authorized entrants   |
|                                  | enter.                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Rescue                           | Retrieving, and providing        |
|                                  | medical assistance to, one or    |
|                                  | more employees who are in a      |
|                                  | permit space.                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Rescue Service                   | The personnel designated to      |
|                                  | rescue employees from permit     |
|                                  | spaces.                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Retrieval System                 | The equipment (including a       |
|                                  | retrieval line, chest or full    |
|                                  | body harness, wristlets or       |
|                                  | anklets, if appropriate, and a   |
|                                  | lifting device or anchor) used   |
|                                  | for nonentry rescue of persons   |
|                                  | from permit spaces.              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Serious Physical Damage          | An impairment or illness in      |
|                                  | which a body part is made        |
|                                  | functionally useless or is       |
|                                  | substantially reduced in         |
|                                  | efficiency. Such impairment or   |
|                                  | illness may be permanent or      |
|                                  | temporary and includes, but is   |
|                                  | not limited to, loss of          |
|                                  | consciousness, disorientation,   |
|                                  | or other immediate and           |
|                                  | substantial reduction in mental  |
|                                  | efficiency. Injuries involving   |
|                                  | such impairment would usually    |
|                                  | require treatment by a physician |
|                                  | or other licensed health-care    |
|                                  | professional.                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Tagout                           | (1) Placement of a tagout device |
|                                  | on a circuit or equipment that   |
|                                  | has been deenergized, in         |
|                                  | accordance with an established   |
|                                  | procedure, to indicate that the  |
|                                  | circuit or equipment being       |
|                                  | controlled may not be operated   |
|                                  | until the tagout device is       |
|                                  | removed; and                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | (2) The employer ensures that    |
|                                  | (i) tagout provides equivalent   |
|                                  | protection to lockout, or (ii)   |
|                                  | that lockout is infeasible and   |
|                                  | the employer has relieved,       |
|                                  | disconnected, restrained and     |
|                                  | otherwise rendered safe stored   |
|                                  | (residual) energy.               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Test or Testing                  | The process by which the hazards |
|                                  | that may confront entrants of a  |
|                                  | permit space are identified and  |
|                                  | evaluated. Testing includes      |
|                                  | specifying the tests that are to |
|                                  | be performed in the permit       |
|                                  | space.                           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Note. Testing enables employers  |
|                                  | both to devise and implement     |
|                                  | adequate control measures for    |
|                                  | the protection of authorized     |
|                                  | entrants and to determine if     |
|                                  | acceptable entry conditions are  |
|                                  | present immediately prior to,    |
|                                  | and during, entry.               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Ventilate or Ventilation         | Controlling a hazardous          |
|                                  | atmosphere using continuous      |
|                                  | forced-air mechanical systems    |
|                                  | that meet the requirements of    |
|                                  | §1926.57—Ventilation.            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

References

  Document Title                                 Reference Number
  ---------------------------------------------- ------------------
  Subpart AA – Confined Spaces in Construction   29 CFR 1926.1200

RESPONSIBILITIES

  [Company Name], the host employer, will oversee the administration of
  the Confined Space Entry Program, but ultimate responsibility for its
  implementation rests with the controlling contractor and each entry
  employer that conducts confined space entry.

  a. Host Employer

  The host employer shall provide the following to the controlling
  contractor:

-   The location of each known permit-required confined space.

-   The hazards or potential hazards in each space or the reason it is a
      permit space.

-   Any precautions that the host employer or any previous controlling
      contractor or entry employer implemented for the protection of
      employees in the permit space.

  b. Controlling Contractor

  The controlling contractor shall:

-   Obtain the host employer’s information about the permit space
      hazards and previous operations.

-   Provide the following information to each entity entering a permit
      space and any other entity at the worksite whose activities could
      foreseeably result in a hazard in the permit space:

    -   The information received from the host employer.

    -   The precautions that the host employer, controlling contractor,
          or other entry employers implemented for the protection of
          employees in the permit spaces.

  c. Entry Employer

  Each entry employer shall:

-   Identify and maintain a list of work locations that are confined
      spaces, and determine whether they are permit-required.

-   Provide confined space training for Entrants, Attendants and Entry
      Supervisors.

-   Provide exposure assessment and/or monitoring of airborne hazards as
      needed to determine whether work areas are permit-required
      confined spaces.

-   Upon request, assist supervisors with:

    -   Identification of permit-required confined spaces.

    -   Selection of safety equipment required for confined space work.

-   Establish and document a method for communication between Entrants
      and Attendants.

-   Ensure that the openings to permit-required confined spaces are
      posted with danger signs, and, where possible, have secured doors
      to prevent unauthorized entry.

-   Provide all information, safety equipment, and job tools necessary
      to safely complete the assigned work in the confined space, and
      ensure that the equipment and tools are maintained in ready-to-use
      condition.

-   Maintains required calibration of air monitoring equipment.

  d. Employees

  It is the responsibility of each employee affected by this program to:

-   Understand the requirements of this Confined Space Entry Program.

-   Annually attend Confined Space Entry training provided by [Company
      Name].

    -   Persons who enter confined spaces, and those assigned to the
          required Attendant position, must complete Confined Space
          Entrant and Attendant training.

    -   Persons who will be assigned the position of Entry Supervisor
          must attend Confined Space Entry Supervisor training.

-   Perform assigned duties according to the procedures listed in this
      Program.

-   Maintain confined space entry equipment in ready-to-use condition,
      keeping it clean and functional per manufacturer’s directions.

-   Never perform a confined space entry unless all provisions of this
      program are observed.

-   Immediately notify his or her supervisor of any problem or question
      regarding confined space work.

  e. Entry Supervisor

  The Entry Supervisor for each permit-required confined space shall:

-   Complete Confined Space Entry Supervisor training prior to assuming
      Entry Supervisor duties.

-   Ensure that the person assigned to be the Attendant has received
      Confined Space Entrant and Attendant training, and understands
      confined space hazards and standby procedures.

-   Ensure the all persons who will enter the confined space have
      received Confined Space Entrant and Attendant training.

-   Minimize the number of employees permitted to enter confined spaces,
      and list every involved employee on the Confined Space Entry
      Permit.

-   Review the job duties and entry permit requirements for the
      permit-required confined space.

-   Ensure that all safety equipment and job tools necessary to safely
      complete the assigned work in the confined space are present and
      in good working condition.

-   Ensure the functionality of the communication method between
      Entrants and Attendants, and the company’s method to summon the
      Emergency Response Team, if needed.

-   Ensure that entry conditions are acceptable:

    -   Verify that the confined space has been decontaminated of
          hazardous materials to the extent feasible prior to entry.

    -   Where potential exists for electric shock, ensure that
          appropriate electrical equipment is used and that any
          electrical equipment used in hazardous locations meets the
          appropriate requirements of the National Electrical Code.

-   Specify, and include on the entry permit, any pre-entry procedures
      necessary to eliminate or isolate hazardous energy sources that
      could be expected to cause injury or illness to entrants if not
      isolated, including electrical, mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic,
      chemical, and thermal sources:

    -   Isolation methods may include securing, relieving pressure,
          blinding, blanking, double block and bleed, and
          lockout/tagout.

    -   In confined spaces where complete isolation is not possible,
          specify as rigorous as practical, and ensure that a hazard
          evaluation is conducted prior to entry.

-   Specify on the Entry Permit the air monitoring necessary to ensure a
      continued safe work environment, and ensure that the Attendant
      understands the monitoring requirements.

-   Ensure that all entrants review the air monitoring results prior to
      entry, and, if a respirator is required, that all entrants have
      appropriate respiratory equipment and current [Company Name]
      certification to wear the respirator they intend to use.

-   Complete and sign the entry permit prior to entry, but only after
      all entry requirements are fully understood and completed.

-   Ensure that all employees entering the confined space know and
      understand their duties, the potential hazards presented by the
      space, the time required to complete the assigned work, the
      required equipment and tools, and the methods of communication
      with a standby employee.

-   Post a copy of the entry permit at the entry site, and submit a copy
      to entry employer.

-   Terminate the entry permit after ensuring all entrants have safely
      exited the space and the space is secure.

-   Refer any questions regarding confined space entry to entry
      employer.

  f. Entry Attendant

  The Attendant for each permit-required confined space shall:

-   Complete Confined Space Entrant and Attendant training prior to
      assuming Attendant duties.

-   Conduct air monitoring and hazard assessment as specified on the
      Entry Permit by the Entry Supervisor.

-   Prohibit entry whenever monitoring indicates that oxygen,
      flammability or toxicity levels are not within acceptable limits
      or until appropriate controls are implemented or appropriate
      personal protective equipment is provided. Acceptable limits are
      as follows (in order of testing):

    -   Oxygen: 19.5% to 23.5%.

    -   Flammability: Less than 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL).

    -   Hydrogen sulfide: Less than 10 parts per million (ppm).

    -   Carbon monoxide: Less than 25 ppm.

    -   Toxicity (substances listed on the Entry Permit under “other”):
          Less than the Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL)

-   If the source of contaminant cannot be determined, initiate
      precautions adequate to deal with the worst possible condition
      that the contaminant could present in the confined space.

-   Require ventilation, when feasible, to remove atmospheric
      contaminants from the confined space until the atmosphere is
      within the acceptable range.

-   Ensure that ventilation is drawn from a clean source and will not
      increase the hazards in the space.

-   When utilizing forced ventilation, periodically test the atmosphere
      to ensure that the ventilation is preventing the accumulation of a
      hazardous atmosphere.

-   When ventilation is not feasible, establish alternative protective
      measures prior to authorizing entry.

-   Continuously assess activities inside and outside of the space to
      determine if it is safe for entrants to remain in the space and
      orders the authorized entrants to evacuate the permit space
      immediately under any of the following conditions:

    -   If there is a prohibited condition.

    -   If the behavioral effects of hazard exposure are apparent in an
          authorized entrant.

    -   If there is a situation outside the space that could endanger
          the authorized entrants.

    -   If the attendant cannot effectively and safely perform all the
          required duties.

-   Summon rescue and emergency services as soon as necessary.

-   Perform non-entry rescue as specified by [Company Name] rescue
      procedure.

-   Terminate the entry whenever a safety concern arises or an
      unauthorized person enters the area.

  g. Authorized Entrant

  The Authorized Entrant for each permit-required confined space shall:

-   Complete Confined Space Entrant and Attendant training prior to
      assuming Authorized Entrant duties.

-   Check the confined space inventory to determine the classification,
      potential hazards and entry requirements for that space prior to
      beginning the work.

-   Understand all the potential hazards associated with working in the
      identified space.

-   Know the signs and symptoms of exposure.

-   Wear and utilize the proper safety equipment to include PPE as
      required by the task.

-   Maintain constant communication with the Attendant.

-   Alert the attendant whenever:

    -   There is any warning sign or symptoms of exposure to a dangerous
          situation.

    -   The entrant detects a prohibited condition.

-   Ensure the appropriate methods of hazard control are practiced,
      including lockout/tagout, hot work permits, and ventilation of the
      hazardous atmosphere.

-   Exit the confined space whenever:

    -   An order to evacuate is given by the Attendant or the Entry
          Supervisor.

    -   The Entrant recognizes any warning signs or symptoms of exposure
          to a dangerous situation.

    -   The Entrant detects a prohibited condition.

    -   An evacuation alarm is activated.

 PREVENTION OF UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY

  [Company Name] will take precautions to prevent unauthorized entry
  into confined spaces.

-   The primary means of deterrent will be through locks, signage and/or
      training. An Attendant or stand-by person will prevent
      unauthorized entry during a permit entry event. Appropriate
      barricades and/or barrier tape will be utilized to identify and
      isolate confined space areas.

-   Entry into non-permit required confined spaces shall be controlled
      by the entry employer responsible for the area or work project.

-   When a permit-required confined space must be entered, a permit
      shall be completed and authorized by the entry employer
      representatives prior to entry into the confined space. This
      permit shall serve as certification that the space is safe for
      entry.

TRAINING

  Training is required prior to initial assignment and at least annually
  for all confined space Entrants, Attendants, and Entry Supervisors,
  and is provided at no cost by [Company Name]. The following components
  are required to be included in Confined Space Entry training:

  a. General Awareness

-   Definition of a confined space

-   Definition of a permit-required confined space

-   Overview of the OSHA regulation

-   Responsibilities of bystanders

  b. Permit-Required Confined Space

-   OSHA permit-required confined space standard

-   [Company Name] Confined Space Entry Program

-   Hazard recognition and control

-   Communications

-   Personal protective equipment

-   Atmospheric monitoring

-   Safe work practices

-   Work planning and supervision

-   Duties of an Entrant, Attendant, and Entry Supervisor

-   The confined space permit

-   Emergency procedures

-   Confined space rescue

  c. Instrumentation

-   Calibration of air monitoring equipment

-   Reading an air monitor display

-   Proper usage of the air monitor

-   Limitations of the air monitor

  d. Employee training records will be maintained by [Company Name] with
  training provided as directed below:

-   Before the employee is assigned any confined space entry duties.

-   Before a change in assigned confined space entry duties.

-   Whenever there is a modification to the confined space entry
      procedures.

-   A review that points to confined space entry inadequacies of
      knowledge or use of procedures.

RECLASSIFYING PERMIT SPACES TO NON-PERMIT SPACES

  Permit-required confined spaces at the [Company Name] worksite may be
  reclassified as non-permit confined spaces under the following
  procedures:

-   If the permit space poses no actual or potential atmospheric hazards
      and if all hazards within the space are eliminated without entry
      into the space, the permit space may be reclassified as a
      non-permit confined space as long as the non-atmospheric hazards
      remain eliminated.

-   [Company Name] shall document the basis for determining that all
      hazards in a permit space have been eliminated through a
      certification that includes the date, location of the space, and
      the signature of the person making the determination. The
      certification shall be made available to each employee entering
      the space or to that employee’s authorized representative. This
      certification form can be found in Attachment B.

-   If hazards arise within a permit space that has been reclassified to
      a non-permit space, each employee shall exit the space. [Company
      Name] personnel shall then reevaluate the space and determine
      whether it must be reclassified as a permit space.

 EQUIPMENT

  Many different types of safety equipment may be required to safely
  perform entries into and rescues from confined spaces. These items
  must be supplied, at no charge, to employees engaged in confined space
  entry and emergency retrieval. The extent of actual equipment required
  will depend on hazards present and the category of the confined space
  being entered. Employee training must include hands-on usage of all
  required equipment to such an extent that the employees become
  proficient in their understanding and use of the equipment, including
  the following:

-   Ventilation fans

-   Full body harnesses, life lines, rescue rated tripods, and
      mechanical lifting devices

-   Appropriate PPE as required by the hazards present

-   Air monitoring equipment

-   Intrinsically safe portable lighting

-   Communications equipment

-   Lockout/tagout devices

-   Barricade equipment

-   Other safety equipment as required to complete the task

 ATMOSPHERIC TESTING

  Air monitoring must be performed by a trained employee prior to
  entering any confined space to evaluate potential atmospheric hazards
  and determine if acceptable entry conditions exist, to include if a
  hazardous condition or oxygen deficiency or enrichment exists. At a
  minimum, oxygen, combustible gases, carbon monoxide and hydrogen
  sulfide will be monitored.

  a. Air Monitoring

  Air testing must be completed prior to entry and must be completed in
  the following order:

-   Oxygen content – Results greater than or equal to 19.5% and less
      than or equal to 23.5%.

-   Flammable/combustible gas content – Results must indicate less than
      10% of the LEL (lower explosive limit).

-   Toxic gases (carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulfide) – Results must
      indicate hydrogen sulfide concentrations less than 10 ppm and
      carbon monoxide concentrations less than 25 ppm.

-   If the pre-entry air monitoring shows that there is no hazardous
      atmosphere or oxygen deficiency/enrichment in the space, there is
      no reason to believe that there is a chance for onto develop, and
      other potential hazardous conditions have been removed or
      controlled, the space may be safely entered to begin work.

  b. Monitoring in a Stratified Atmosphere

-   Atmospheric measurements shall be taken every 4 feet from the top,
      middle and bottom, and every 4 feet in the direction of travel and
      to each side.

-   Different gases accumulate at different levels in a given space. For
      example, methane is lighter than air and will usually be found
      nearer the top of the space, while hydrogen sulfide is heavier
      than air and will typically collect at the bottom of the space.

  c. Continuous Air Monitoring

  Air quality inside the permit-required confined space must be
  continuously monitored due to the potential for changing atmospheric
  conditions. These results are to be recorded on the entry permit. To
  meet this requirement, a four-gas meter is used to continuously
  monitor the atmosphere inside the space. The preceding shall be
  completed using one of the following methods:

-   Place the monitor inside with the Entrant.

-   Place the monitor inside and set up a remote alarm outside with the
      Attendant.

-   Set up the remote sampling tube with the Entrant and place the
      monitor outside with the Attendant.

  d. Calibrating and Maintaining Air Monitoring Equipment

-   All monitoring equipment must be properly calibrated and maintained
      in good working condition.

-   All calibrations shall be completed according to the manufacturer’s
      specifications.

-   Calibration logs for each instrument shall be kept up to date and
      inspected regularly to ensure accuracy.

 HAZARD ELIMINATION AND CONTROL

  The Entry Supervisor will identify all potential hazards concerning
  the permit-required confined space. Each hazard will be eliminated or
  controlled. Hazards may exist in any of the following categories:

  a. Atmospheric Hazards/Ventilation

  Fresh air ventilation is the first option for correcting an
  atmospheric hazard.

-   Force fresh air into the space.

-   Get airflow to bottom of the space.

-   Use continuously.

  b. Contents and Residues

  Contents should be removed from the space when possible. Entrants must
  assume that residues may be present and protect themselves from
  contact with harmful materials.

-   Remove contents

-   Clean and isolate space.

-   Wear appropriate PPE to protect against contact with materials.

  c. Potential Energy

  Potential energy sources must be secured. They include:

-   Electrical equipment and circuits.

-   Hydraulic equipment and systems.

-   Pneumatic equipment and systems.

-   Mechanical equipment and systems.

-   Thermal energy equipment and systems.

  d. Environment in the Space

  Entrants will need to address any safety issues, including the
  following:

-   Slippery surfaces

-   Extreme temperatures

  e. Configuration of the Space

  The configuration of the space can make safe operations more
  difficult. Use particular care when any of the following are present:

-   Unusual shape or slope

-   Low overhead clearance

-   Drop-offs in floors

-   Complex layout

  f. External Hazards

-   External hazards such as vehicle traffic, machinery, equipment, and
      processes may increase the hazards of the confined space entry.

-   External hazards must be controlled prior to entering the confined
      space.

 CONFINED SPACE ENTRY PROCEDURES

  When entry into a confined space is necessary, the supervisor shall
  initiate entry procedures, including the completion of the entry
  permit or reclassification of the permit-required space to a
  non-permit space. Entry into a confined space shall follow the
  standard entry procedures below:

  a. Entry into a Permit-Required Confined Space

-   The Entry Supervisor physically inspects the space if the entry is
      at that time a “Permit-Required,” “Alternate Procedure,” or
      “Non-Permit” entry. Entry Supervisor then completes all items on
      the Confined Space Entry Permit.

-   Entry Supervisor retains a copy of the Entry Permit, and posts the
      Entry Permit at the entry site.

-   At least one Attendant externally monitors the permit-required
      confined space being entered for the duration of the entry
      operation.

-   Attendants and Entrants maintain rescue equipment and any other
      equipment as specified on the permit.

-   Attendant verifies acceptable entry conditions by identifying and
      controlling or eliminating any hazards, and by testing the
      atmosphere with a four-gas meter at 4-foot intervals.

-   Attendant directs the Entrant(s) to enter and exit the space, and
      conducts periodic checks of hazard controls.

-   Attendant orders immediate evacuation of the space if safety
      equipment fails or if the space becomes, or has the potential to
      become, immediately hazardous. If necessary, the Attendant summons
      emergency responders, but NEVER ENTERS the space.

-   When the confined space operation is complete, the Entry Supervisor
      accounts for all Entrants, ensures that the space is secured, and
      terminates the entry by initialing the Entry Permit.

-   Submit terminated permit to the entry employer.

  b. Entry into a Permit-Required Confined Space Using Alternate
  Procedures

-   This Alternate Entry Procedure may be used if the only hazard
      present in the confined space is (as determined by the Entry
      Supervisor):

    -   Atmospheric in nature, and

    -   The atmospheric hazard can be controlled by mechanical
          ventilation alone, and

    -   The permit-required confined space will not become immediately
          dangerous to life and health (IDLH) if the mechanical
          ventilation fails.

-   After evaluating the permit-required confined space and establishing
      appropriate atmospheric controls, the Entry Supervisor may
      classify the permit space as an alternate entry confined space by
      completing the appropriate sections on the Entry Permit.

-   Entry Supervisor submits a copy of the permit to the entry company
      and posts the permit at the entry site.

-   The Entrant may enter the confined space without the assistance or
      use of an Attendant, following the procedure below. When entering
      the alternate entry confined space, the Entrant will:

    -   Establish and ensure that the mechanical ventilation system is
          operational and providing clean, fresh air to the Entrant’s
          work location within the space during the entire entry.

    -   Test the atmosphere of the permit-required space prior to entry
          into the space.

    -   Use and continually operate a gas detector during the entire
          confined space operation.

    -   Immediately evacuate the space if ventilation fails, or if the
          portable air sampling equipment fails or enters alarm mode.

-   Immediately evacuate the space if you discover, or become aware of a
      previously unrecognized hazard. If this occurs, immediately notify
      the Entry Supervisor. The Entry Supervisor shall re-evaluate the
      permit-required space and implements appropriate safety
      precautions prior to resuming the confined space operation.

-   All steps taken to reclassify the permit-required space to an
      alternate entry space must be written on the Entry Permit.

  c. Entry into a Non-Permit Confined Space

-   If there are no inherent hazards associated with the space, or if
      all inherent hazards have been eliminated (not just controlled but
      eliminated), the space may be classified as a non-permit confined
      space, and entered using the following guidelines. When entering
      the non-permit confined space, the Entrant will:

    -   Survey the surrounding area before entry for potential hazards
          and sources of drifting vapors and gases.

    -   Always test the non-permit confined space with a four-gas meter
          before entry, and document pre-entry tests.

    -   Follow [Company Name] safety rules and use generally acceptable
          safe work practices when entering and working in non-permit
          confined spaces.

    -   Never use paints, thinners, chemicals, or weld or create any
          other atmospheric hazard while working in a non-permit
          confined space.

    -   Never introduce any other atmospheric, mechanical, engulfing, or
          electrical hazard into the space.

-   No Attendant or arrangement for rescue service is necessary when
      workers into non-permit confined spaces.

-   All steps taken to reclassify a permit-required confined space to a
      non-permit confined space must be written on the Entry Permit.

  d. Emergency Rescue Procedures

  Non-Entry Rescue

-   Retrieval systems are required whenever an authorized Entrant enters
      a permit-required space.

-   Each authorized Entrant shall use a full-body harness, with a
      retrieval line attached at the center of the Entrant’s back near
      shoulder level.

-   The other end of the retrieval lie shall be attached to a mechanical
      device or fixed point outside the permit-required space in such a
      manner that rescue can begin as soon as the rescuer becomes aware
      that rescue is necessary.

-   A mechanical device shall be available to retrieve personnel from
      vertical type permit-required spaces more than 5 feet deep.

  Entry Rescue

-   In the event of any emergency situation requiring rescue from a
      confined space, [Company Name] employees shall not attempt to
      enter the space to perform a rescue. The Attendant on duty shall
      immediately implement the predetermined emergency rescue system,
      and contact <ENTER RESCUE ENTITY NAME>.

-   Rescue services that can be performed safely from outside the
      confined space (e.g. hoisting a harnessed Entrant) shall be
      undertaken. Other Entrants in the space shall immediately exit the
      space and only provide assistance that does not endanger them.

-   <ENTER RESCUE ENTITY NAME> is the primary emergency rescue service
      associated with [Company Name] confined space entries.

 PROCEDURE REVIEW

This procedure will be reviewed at least annually by [Company Name] and revised as necessary. 

 RECORDKEEPING

  Records shall be maintained indefinitely.

  a. Confined Space Inventory

-   [Company Name] shall maintain an updated inventory of all
      permit-required and non-permit confined spaces.

  b. Confined Space Training

-   [Company Name] shall provide and document training for all employees
      with duties relating to confined space entry. Any refresher
      training or retraining shall be documented by Entrant supervisors
      and forwarded to [Company Name].

c.  Confined Space Permit

-   Each permit for confined space entry shall be maintained by the
      Entry Supervisor’s company, and copies of all permits shall be
      forwarded to [Company Name] for filing.

ATTACHMENT C.1.—CONFINED SPACE ENTRY PERMIT 

[TABLE]

ATTACHMENT C.2.—RECLASSIFICATION FORM

.

APPENDIX D:

RESPIRATORY PROTECTION PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.134

{Sample Written Program from ACC-CPI, November 2013}

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE

    a.  Mandatory Use of Respirators

    b.  Voluntary Use of Respirators

2.  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES

    a.  [Health and Safety Officer Title] Responsibilities

    b.  Project Manager Responsibilities

    c.  Employees Responsibilities

    d.  Medical Provider Responsibilities

3.  PROGRAM ELEMENTS

    a.  Medical Evaluation

    b.  Respirator Selection

    c.  Respirator Fit Testing

    d.  Respirator Use General

    e.  Cleaning, Maintenance, and Storage

    f.  Training

4.  PROGRAM EVALUATION

5.  DOCUMENTATION AND RECORDKEEPING

6.  REFERENCES/RESOURCES

ATTACHMENT D.1.—OSHA Bitrex™ Respirator Fit Test Protocol

ATTACHMENT D.2.—OSHA Respiratory Medical Evaluation Questionnaire

ATTACHMENT D.3.—Respirator Fit Test Record (Qualitative)

ATTACHMENT D.4.—Respirator Protection Training—QUIZ

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

The purpose of this program is to protect all employees of [Company
Name] from respiratory hazards, and to ensure that the company is in
compliance with OSHA’s Respiratory Protection Program Standard 29
CFR§1910.134.

Engineering controls, such as ventilation and substitution of less toxic
materials, may not be completely effective in controlling airborne
hazards. Routine operations and reasonably foreseeable emergency
situations associated with the operations are considered when assessing
respirator protection and other types of personal protective equipment
(PPE) used to safeguard employees’ health.

Mandatory Use of Respirators

In any workplace where respirators are necessary to protect the health
of the employee, or whenever respirators are required by the employer,
the employer shall establish and implement a written respiratory
protection program with worksite-specific procedures. The program shall
be updated as necessary to reflect those changes in workplace conditions
that affect respirator use. The employer shall include in the program
the provisions of 29 CFR § 1910.134(c)(1), as applicable.

[Company Name] has determined that some employees in certain work tasks
are exposed to respiratory hazards. All employees performing these tasks
must wear the designated equipment, or equipment providing greater or
equivalent protection.

Additionally, [Company Name] requires these employees to participate in
the company’s respiratory protection program as a condition of continued
employment. An employee’s failure to do so may result in disciplinary
action, up to and including termination for serious or repeated
infractions.

Employees of [Company Name] are required to wear respirators or personal
protective equipment (PPE) when the following situations exist:

-   There is exposure to air contaminants above a specific exposure
      limit.

-   Respirators or PPE are necessary to protect employee health.

-   During specific routine work practices, processes or tasks
      identified by [Company Name] require use of a respirator or PPE.

  In all cases, employees participating in this program do so at no cost
  to themselves. The expenses associated with training, medical
  evaluations, and equipment are the sole responsibility of [Company
  Name].

Voluntary Use of Respirators

If an employee desires to wear a respirator during certain operations in
non-hazardous areas, [Company Name] will review each such request on a
case-by-case basis.

An employee may use the respirator provided or may provide his or her
own for voluntary use, if:

-   Doing so does not jeopardize the employee’s health or safety, or
      that of co-workers.

-   The equipment itself does not create a workplace hazard.

-   The [Health and Safety Officer Title] (Respiratory Protection
      Program Administrator) has approved the use.

  All employees voluntarily wearing respirators are required to receive
  a copy of “Information for Employees Using Respirators When Not
  Required Under the Standard.” See References and Resources in Section
  6 of this document. [Company Name] must review this OSHA information
  with each employee prior to their voluntary use of respiratory
  protective equipment.

  In addition, employees voluntarily using tight-fitting respirators
  must follow the medical surveillance, cleaning, maintenance, and
  storage procedures in this program. [Company Name] may assign other
  additional program requirements for those voluntarily wearing
  respirators or other PPE.

  Employees voluntarily wearing dust masks (filtering facepiece) are not
  subject to the program’s medical evaluation. However, their equipment
  must be clean and free of contamination and may not interfere with the
  employee’s ability to work safely[1]. These employees are also
  provided a copy of Appendix II and the information is reviewed with
  them before their use of dust masks.

  {NOTE TO PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR: Table 1 is to be customized for
  [Company Name].}

  Table 1 is to be completed to communicate where respirators are
  required in the operations of [Company Name].

Table 1

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|   Voluntary and      |                      |                      |
|   Required           |                      |                      |
|   Respirator Use     |                      |                      |
+======================+======================+======================+
|   Respirator Type    |   Department/Task    |   Respiratory        |
|                      |                      |   Hazard/PEL         |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|   (type of           |   (describe          |   (describe hazard)  |
|   respirator)        |   operations)        |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|   Filtering          |   Cutting, grinding, |   None—Voluntary     |
|   facepiece (e.g.,   |   cleanup, and       |   use—particulates   |
|   paper-type dust    |   disposal of        |   not otherwise      |
|   mask)              |   properly-applied   |   regulated (e.g.,   |
|                      |   SPF materials.     |   nuisance dust)     |
|                      |   Surface cleaning   |                      |
|                      |   when non-hazardous |                      |
|                      |   particles are      |                      |
|                      |   present.           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|   Half-face Air      |   Application of     |   There is exposure  |
|   Purifying          |   high-pressure SPF  |   to airborne        |
|   Respirator with    |   in outdoor         |   polymeric MDI and  |
|   organic vapor      |   operations such as |   some amine         |
|   cartridge          |   exterior walls,    |   catalysts above    |
|   pre-filter and     |   tanks, and         |   published PEL.     |
|   particulate filter |   low-slope roofs    |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |   all installation   |                      |
|                      |   of low-pressure    |                      |
|                      |   SPF                |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
|   Full-face Supplied |   Application of     |   There is exposure  |
|   Air Respirator     |   high-pressure SPF  |   to airborne        |
|                      |   in indoor          |   polymeric MDI and  |
|                      |   operations with    |   some amine         |
|                      |   poor ventilation   |   catalysts above    |
|                      |                      |   published PEL.     |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

“The employer shall designate a program administrator who is qualified
by appropriate training or experience that is commensurate with the
complexity of the program to administer or oversee the respiratory
protection program and conduct the required evaluations of program
effectiveness.” (29 CFR § 1910.134(c)(3))

[Health and Safety Officer Title] Responsibilities

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] is responsible for administering
the Respiratory Protection Program.

The Respiratory Protection Program Administrator’s duties may include
the following:

-   Identifying work areas, processes, or tasks that require workers to
      wear respirators, and evaluating hazards

-   Selecting appropriate and approved respiratory protection options

-   Monitoring respirator use to ensure that respirators are used in
      accordance with their certifications

-   Arranging for and conducting training

-   Ensuring proper storage, cleaning, inspection, and maintenance of
      respiratory protection equipment

-   Assign a cartridge replacement schedule as appropriate

-   Conducting qualitative and quantitative fit testing

-   Administering the medical surveillance program

-   Maintaining required program records

-   Evaluating the respiratory protection program

-   Updating the written program, as necessary

  NOTE: There may be additional duties not set forth above.

Project Manager Responsibilities

Project Managers are responsible for ensuring that the Respiratory
Protection Program is implemented in their work areas in accordance with
all OSHA standards. In addition to being knowledgeable about the program
requirements for their own protection, supervisors also ensure that the
program is understood and followed by the employees under their
supervision.

Project Manager duties may include the following:

-   Ensure supervised employees (including all new hires) receive
      appropriate training, fit testing, and annual medical evaluations.

-   Ensure the availability of appropriate respirators and accessories.

-   Be aware of tasks requiring the use of respiratory protection.

-   Enforce the proper use of respiratory protection.

-   Ensure that respirators are properly cleaned, maintained, inspected,
      and stored in accordance with the respiratory protection plan.

-   Monitor work areas and operations with sufficient frequency to
      identify respiratory hazards and select proper equipment.

-   Ensure respirators fit well and do not cause discomfort. Coordinate
      with the Program Administrator on how to address respiratory
      hazards or other concerns regarding the program.

-   Ensure adequate air quantity, quality, and flow of breathing air for
      atmosphere-supplying respirators. (See (c)(1) of the standard).

Employee Responsibilities

Each employee must wear his or her respirator when and where required
under the conditions specified by this program. They are also obligated
to use the equipment according to the training procedures for each
model.

Employees may be responsible for the following:

-   Being familiar with this program

-   Caring for and maintaining the respirators as instructed, and
      storing them in a clean, sanitary location

-   Performing positive and negative pressure respirator checks before
      each use

-   Informing the supervisor if the respirator no longer fits well, and
      requesting a new one that fits properly

-   Informing the supervisor or Program Administrator of any potential
      respiratory hazards or other concerns regarding the program

-   Informing the supervisor of need for a medical reevaluation

Medical Provider Responsibilities

Medical Department {Insert Medical Contractor/Provider if there is no
on-site facility} is responsible for the medical evaluation of all
employees in the program to ensure that they are physically able to
perform the work and wear the equipment (29 CFR § 1910.134(e)).

PROGRAM ELEMENTS

Medical Evaluation

“Medical evaluation: Using a respirator may place a physiological burden
on employees that varies with the type of respirator worn, the job and
workplace conditions in which the respirator is used, and the medical
status of the employee.” (29 CFR § 1910.134(e)).

Accordingly, this paragraph specifies the minimum requirements for
medical evaluation that employers must implement to determine the
employee’s ability to use a respirator as set forth in 29 CFR §
1910.134(e).

Any employee who is required to wear a respirator, or chooses to wear an
air-purifying respirator (APR) voluntarily, must first pass a medical
evaluation and have medical approval before wearing the equipment on the
job. Voluntary use of filtering facepieces (i.e., dust masks) such as
{Insert type(s) of dust mask used} are excluded from this requirement,
as stated in 29 CFR § 1910.134(c)(2)(ii).

Employees are not permitted to wear respirators until a physician has
determined that they are medically able to do so. Employees refusing the
medical evaluation cannot work in areas requiring respirator use. The
evaluation is conducted using the questionnaire provided in Attachment
D.2 of this document, or an actual examination that obtains the same
information. All examinations and questionnaires are to remain
confidential between the employee and the physician or other licensed
health care professional (PLHCP).

The medical evaluation will be conducted by: {Name of clinic or name of
physician/PLHCP)}

I.  Evaluation Procedures

-   Every employee requiring medical evaluation is given a copy of the
      medical questionnaire in Attachment D.2[2], along with a stamped
      envelope addressed to the physician or other PLHCP. The employee
      is to complete the confidential questionnaire during his or her
      work shift and mail it in the envelope provided.

-   To the extent feasible, [Company Name] accommodates employees unable
      to read the questionnaire. At an employee’s request someone other
      than {Program Administrator} may be asked to assist in reading the
      document. If this is not possible, the employee will be sent to
      the PLHCP for a medical evaluation.

-   Follow-up medical exams are given to employees as required by the
      OSHA standard or as deemed necessary by the PLHCP.

-   All employees can speak with the PLHCP about their medical
      evaluation[3].

-   Any employee required by medical reasons to wear a positive pressure
      air purifying respirator is provided a powered air purifying
      respirator.

  After an employee has received approval and started using a
  respirator, an additional medical evaluation is conducted for the
  following reasons, outside of the annual re-evaluation according to 29
  CFR § 1910.134(e)(7):

-   The employee reports signs and symptoms related to his or her
      ability to use a respirator, such as shortness of breath,
      dizziness, chest pains, or wheezing

-   The PLHCP or supervisor informs the Program Administrator of a
      reevaluation need.

-   Information from this program, including observations made during
      fit testing and program evaluation, indicates a need for
      reevaluation.

-   A change occurs in the workplace conditions that may result in an
      increased physiological burden on the employee.

II. Determination of Fitness

  A physician or other licensed health care professional (PLHCP) at
  {Name of clinic, or name of PLHCP} evaluates the completed health care
  questionnaire[4].

  Prior to making a formal determination, [Company Name] provides the
  PLHCP with the following information on respirator usage in accordance
  with CFR § 1910.134(e)(5)(i):

-   The respirator equipment’s type and weight

-   Use frequency and duration

-   Expected work effort

-   Additional personal protective clothing or equipment to be used

-   Estimated temperature and humidity extremes expected in the work
      area where the respirator is to be used[5]

  The PLHCP provides a recommendation of each employee’s physical
  ability to wear a respirator and perform the assigned work. Such
  evaluations will be provided in writing and shall provide only the
  following information in accordance with CFR § 1910 134(e)(6):

-   Any limitations on respirator use related to the medical condition
      of the employee or related to the workplace conditions in which
      the respirator will be used, including whether or not the employee
      is medically able to use the respirator

-   The need, if any, for follow-up medical evaluations

-   A statement that the PLHCP has provided the employee with a copy of
      the PLHCP's written recommendation

III. Follow-up Medical Examination

  If an employee responds affirmatively to any of questions 1 through 8
  in Section 2 of OSHA’s Medical Evaluation Questionnaire (See
  Attachment A, Appendix II), or if the PLHCP deems it necessary, a
  follow-up exam is provided. This exam includes any medical tests,
  consultations, or diagnostic procedures that the PLHCP needs to make a
  final determination for safe respirator usage.

Respirator Selection

“Respirators shall be provided by the employer when such equipment is
necessary to protect the health of the employee The employer shall
provide the respirators which are applicable and suitable for the
purpose intended The employer shall be responsible for the establishment
and maintenance of a respiratory protection program ” (29 CFR § 1910
134(a)(2)).

[Company Name] has performed an exposure assessment identifying the
respiratory hazard(s) found in its workplace[6]. The decision matrix
used in this process is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Center for the Polyurethanes Industry

MDI Exposure Assessment Decision Matrix for Selecting Respiratory
Protection

[]

  Based on the information in Figure 1, and in accordance with all OSHA
  Standards, the Program Administrator selects the respirator to be
  used.

Respirator Fit Testing

“Fit testing. This paragraph requires that, before an employee may be
required to use any respirator with a negative or positive pressure
tight-fitting facepiece, the employee must be fit tested with the same
make, model, style, and size of respirator that will be used. This
paragraph specifies the kinds of fit tests allowed, the procedures for
conducting them, and how the results of the fit tests must be used” (29
CFR § 1910.134(f)).

Fit testing is required by OSHA for employees wearing respirators with a
negative or positive pressure, tight-fitting facepiece. The fit test is
conducted using the respirator the employee will be wearing on the job.

Fit testing is conducted in accordance with 29 CFR § 1910 134(f):

-   Prior to initial use of the respirator

-   If a different respirator facepiece (size, style, model, or make) is
      used

-   When there are changes in the employee’s physical condition that
      could affect respiratory fit (e.g., obvious change in body weight,
      facial scarring, etc.)

-   On an annual basis

  The company uses a qualitative fit test (QLFT) or a quantitative fit
  test (QNFT) method as designated in Table 2[7]. If an employee passes
  either test, but notifies the employer that the fit is unacceptable,
  the employee is allowed to select a different respirator and be
  retested.

  The Program Administrator will conduct fit tests following the OSHA
  approved Bitrex™ Solution Aerosol QLFT protocol.

  NOTE TO PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR: Appendix A of the OSHA 1910.134 is
  titled: Fit Testing Procedures (Mandatory). The requirements in this
  appendix apply to all OSHA-accepted fit test methods, both Qualitative
  Fit Testing (QLFT) and Quantitative Fit Testing (QNFT). The Program
  Administrator must be knowledgeable of the information in this
  Appendix if the company performs their own respiratory fit testing on
  employees. Attachment D.1 (attached to this Model Respiratory Program)
  is an example of one QLFT fit test procedure (Bitrex™) accepted by
  OSHA Appendix III (attached to this Model Respiratory Program) is an
  example form documenting and Employee Fit Test Record.

Table 2

OSHA Acceptable Fit-Testing Methods

[]

Respirator Use General

Use instructions each time a respirator is worn, the wearer must conduct
a user seal check (29 CFR § 1910 134(g)(1)(iii)). Employees may select
either the positive or negative pressure check[8]. Additional PPE,
combined with respirator use, may be necessary to adequately prevent
exposure. The use of eye, face, or skin protection may be required
during certain processes. Consult the process supervisor for other
required equipment.

In accordance with 29 CFR § 1910 134(g)(1), tight fitting facepiece
respirators are not permitted for use if:

-   An employee has facial hair that interferes with either the sealing
      surface of the respirator and the face, or interferes with the
      valve function.

-   Corrective glasses, goggles, or other personal protective equipment
      interferes with the seal of the facepiece.

-   Any other condition interferes with the facepiece seal.

  In accordance with 29 CFR § 1910 134(g)(2), the employee must vacate
  the respirator use area for any of the following reasons:

-   To wash his or her face and respirator facepiece, as necessary to
      prevent respirator-induced eye or skin irritation

-   If vapor or gas breakthrough is detected

-   If there is a change in breathing resistance

-   If there is facepiece leakage

-   To replace the respirator or filter, or to change the cartridge or
      canister

a.  Cleaning, Maintenance, and Storage

Requirement: “Procedures and schedules for cleaning, disinfecting,
storing, inspecting, repairing, discarding, and otherwise maintaining
respirators” (29 CFR §1910.134(c)(1)(v)).

Respirators are to be regularly cleaned and disinfected according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. APRs are to be cleaned and disinfected as
often as necessary to be maintained in a sanitary condition. SARs and
emergency use respirators are to be cleaned and disinfected after each
use according to 29 CFR § 1910 134(h)(1)(iii).

I.  Cleaning

  Follow these general steps for cleaning and disinfecting respirators
  refer to the manufacturer for specific directions:

1)  Disassemble respirator removing all filters, canisters, or
      cartridges.

2)  Wash the facepiece and associated parts in a mild detergent with
      warm water. Do not use organic solvents or bleach.

3)  Rinse thoroughly in clean, warm water.

4)  Wipe the respirator with disinfectant wipes (70% isopropyl alcohol)
      to kill germs.

5)  Air-dry in a clean area. If a clean area is not available, use clean
      disposable paper towels to blot excess moisture.

6)  Reassemble the respirator and replace any defective parts (noting
      the condition of the head straps and valve flaps).

7)  Place in a clean, dry plastic bag or other airtight container.

  The Program Administrator is responsible for ensuring there are
  adequate cleaning and disinfecting supplies. If supplies are low,
  employees can notify their Supervisor or the Program Administrator.

II. Maintenance

  After leaving the respirator use area, employees can do limited
  maintenance on their equipment only in an area that is free from
  respiratory hazards.

  Respirators are to be properly maintained at all times so that they
  function properly and adequately protect the employee. Maintenance
  involves a thorough visual inspection for cleanliness and defects.
  Worn or deteriorated parts must be replaced prior to equipment use.

  No components are replaced or repairs made beyond those recommended by
  the manufacturer. Repairs or adjustments to respirators are to be made
  only by persons appropriately trained to perform such operations and
  shall use only the respirator manufacturer's NIOSH-approved parts
  designed for the respirator according to 29 CFR § 1910 134(h).

  The following checklist (Table 3) may be used when inspecting
  respirators:

Table 3

Respirator Inspection Checklist

     Facepiece: cracks, tears, holes, facemask distortion, cracked or loose lenses or face shield
  -- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Head straps: breaks, tears, broken buckles or clasps, overstretched elastic bands
     Valves: residue or dirt, cracks or tears in valve material, absence of valve flap
     Filters and Cartridges: proper cartridge for hazard, approval designation, intact gaskets, cracks or dents in housing
     Air Supply Systems: breathing air quality or grade, condition of supply hoses, hose connections, settings on regulators and valves

  Defective respirators or those with defective parts are taken out of
  service immediately (29 CFR §1910.134(h)(4)). Employees should notify
  their supervisor about all respirator defects. It is the Supervisor’s
  responsibility to give the defective equipment either to the Program
  Administrator or to the individual charged with replacement or repair.
  The Program Administrator then decides whether to:

-   Temporarily take the respirator out of service until it can be
      repaired.

-   Have it repaired.

-   Dispose of it if the problem is irreparable.

III. Storage

  APRs are stored in a clean, dry area and following the manufacturer’s
  recommendations. Employees inspect and clean their own respirators
  according to the provisions of this program. The equipment is stored
  in plastic bags or airtight containers. Each bag or container is
  marked with an employee name, and only that employee can use it for
  their equipment storage (29 CFR §1910 134(h)(2)).

  A supply of respirators and replacement components is stored in the
  original manufacturer’s packaging in the {Respirator storage area or
  location}.

IV. Cartridge and Canister Change-Out Schedules

  In the application of product containing MDI, the use of an
  air-purifying respirator (APR) may be permitted if the airborne MDI
  concentration is no greater than 10 times the American Conference of
  Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) threshold limit value (TLV)
  or OSHA PEL. If an APR is selected, the cartridge must be equipped
  with an end of service life indicator (ESLI) certified by NIOSH, or a
  change-out schedule, based on objective information or data that will
  ensure that the cartridges are changed out before the end of their
  service life, must be developed and implemented. When using an APR
  respirator, a pre-filter combined with an organic vapor cartridge is
  recommended. APR cannot be used if (1) the employee is working in the
  zone of the contaminant (e.g., visible overspray is evident on the
  workers body), or (2) in the construction industry where spray foam
  application is inside a structure or a confined space with inadequate
  ventilation. In these situations, PAPR or SAR is provided. Contact the
  respirator manufacturer or the product supplier for their
  recommendation on specific cartridge use. The basis for the change out
  schedule must be described in the employer’s written respirator
  program.

  Employees wearing APR with particulate pre-filters for protection
  against wood dust and other particulates must change their cartridges
  when they experience difficulty breathing (i.e., resistance) while
  wearing their mask, according to the manufacturer.

V.  Equipment Malfunction During Use

1)  Air-Purifying Respirators (APR)

  If an APR or any of its components malfunctions (breakthrough,
  facepiece leakage, or faulty valve), the wearer must leave the
  respirator use area immediately and notify the supervisor about the
  malfunction. The supervisor is then responsible for ensuring that the
  employee receives the necessary repair parts or a new functional
  respirator.

2)  Supplied-Air Respirator (SAR)

  Usually, employees using SAR work in pairs. If one experiences an SAR
  malfunction, then he or she notifies the partner of the problem by
  using hand signals. The partner then escorts the affected employee
  outside the respirator use area.

  Supplied-air respirators use only Grade D breathing air as described
  in ANSI/ Compressed Gas Association Commodity Specification for Air,
  G-7 1-1989[9]. The Program Administrator will maintain a Certificate
  of Analysis from the supplier that (1) Grade D breathing air is
  contained in the cylinders used to supply breathing air, (2) cylinders
  are tested and maintained as required in the Shipping Container
  Specification Regulations of the Department of Transportation, and (3)
  the moisture content in the cylinder does not exceed a dew point of
  -50 degrees Fahrenheit at one atmosphere pressure for each shipment of
  cylinders received or for the purification system used to clean
  breathing air in a hose or compressor system.

Training

“Training of employees in the proper use of respirators, including
putting on and removing them, any limitations on their use, and their
maintenance” is required by 29 CFR §1910.134(c)(1)(viii).

The Program Administrator provides training to respirator users and
their supervisors on:

-   Contents of [Company Name] respiratory protection program

-   Responsibilities of employees and supervisors

-   Requirements of OSHA’s respiratory protection standard

  All training occurs prior to any respirator use in the workplace.
  Supervisors receive their training prior to supervising employees
  required to use respirators.

  The training program covers the following topics:

-   Elements of [Company Name] respiratory protection program

-   The information covered under OSHA Standard 29 CFR § 1910 134

-   Respiratory hazards encountered at the worksite

-   Proper selection and use of respirators

-   Additional PPE

-   Respirator limitations

-   How to perform user seal (fit) checks

-   Fit testing

-   Emergency respirator use procedures

-   Respirator maintenance and storage

-   Medical signs and symptoms limiting effective respirator use

  OSHA requires employees to demonstrate their understanding of the
  topics covered in the training through hands-on exercises and a
  written quiz. The Program Administrator documents respirator training.
  Refer to Appendix D.4 of this document for a copy of the Respirator
  Protection Training Quiz. This documentation includes the type, model,
  and size of respirator on which each employee has been trained and fit
  tested.

  Employees are retrained annually or as needed (i.e., relocation to
  another department using a different type of respirator).

PROGRAM EVALUATION 

“This section requires the employer to conduct evaluations of the
workplace to ensure that the written respiratory protection program is
being properly implemented, and to consult employees to ensure that they
are using the respirators properly” (29 CFR § 1910.134(l)).

The Program Administrator and other responsible supervisors conduct
periodic evaluations of the workplace to ensure that the provisions of
this program are being implemented. These evaluations can include
regular consultations with both the employees using respirators and
their supervisors. There may be other topics that a company determines
are appropriate. This can identify areas for improvement and address
problems.

Records’ reviews, site inspections, and periodic air monitoring also
assist in program review.

DOCUMENTATION AND RECORDKEEPING

The Program Administrator maintains the following records:

-   A written copy of this program and the OSHA standard (this
    information is available to any interested employee)

-   Training and fit testing records updated as new employees are
    trained, when existing employees receive refresher training, or when
    new fit testing is conducted

-   Written recommendations from the PLHCP on an employee’s ability to
    use respirators Medical evaluations maintained in accordance with
    the OSHA Medical Records Standard (29 CFR § 1910.1020)

The OSHA website hosts additional information about topics such as
respiratory fit testing procedures, user seal check procedures,
respiratory cleaning procedures, and the OSHA Respiratory Medical
Evaluation Questionnaire. You should access OSHA's website at
www.osha.gov for more information.

RESOURCES

Click on the following link to open the full text of Attachment 1:

29 CFR § 1910 134 Respiratory Protection Standard and Appendices, OSHA

For the most up-to-date information on these sections of OSHA
regulations, click below to visit the OSHA website:
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&P_id=12716&p_text_version=FALSE

Fit Testing Procedures

  http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9780&p_text_version=FALSE

I.  User Seal Check Procedures

  http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_
  table=STANDARDS&p_id=9781&p_text_version=FALSE

II. Respiratory Cleaning Procedures

  http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=978&p_text_version=FALSE

OSHA Respirator Medical Evaluation Questionnaire 

  http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9783&p_text_version=FALSE

Information for Employees Using Respirators When Not Required Under the Standard

  http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9784&p_
  text_version=FALSE

I.  Excerpts from “Risk Assessment - Methylenediphenyl diisocyanate,
      CAS-No :26447-40-5, EINECS- No : 247-714-0,” Draft of 5.02.99

II. OSHA Standard for Respiratory Protection requirements for Allowable
      Use of Air-purifying Respirators (APR) Against Gases and Vapors -
      Excerpts from OSHA documents

III. Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Air-purifying Respirator
       Cartridges in Removing MDI Aerosols From Air, M W Spence, T D
       Landry, D W Huff; Environment, Health, and Safety, The Dow
       Chemical Company, Midland, Michigan 48674; (517)636-2331

IV. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Policy
      Statement, NIOSH Respirator Use Policy/OSHA’s §1910 134, August 4,
      1999

V.  For the most up-to-date information on this topic, click to visit
      the NIOSH website:
      http://www.3m.com/market/safety/ohes2/html/nioshPolicyStatement.html

VI. Questions and Answers on the Respiratory Protection Standard
      (English only) OSHA and Appendices

1)  Appendix D (Spanish Translation)

2)  Respirator Use Requirements Flowchart

3)  State Licensing Boards Information

4)  Respirator Medical Evaluation Questionnaire (English)

  For the most up-to-date information on this topic and for the
  translations, click below to visit the OSHA website:
  http://www.osha-slc.gov/qna.pdf.

VII. Letter from Richard Fairfax, OSHA, Directorate of Compliance
       Programs, to David G Sarvadi, Keller and Heckman, LLP, July 18,
       2000, and Larry Janssen, CIH, 3M Company, July 18, 2000

Attachment D.1.—OSHA Bitrex™ Respirator Fit Test Protocol

The purpose of a fit test is to meet OSHA Standard 29 CFR §1910.134. The
Bitrex™ (Denatonium benzoate) solution aerosol QLFT protocol uses the
published saccharin test protocol because that protocol is widely
accepted. Bitrex™ is routinely used as a taste aversion agent in
household liquids which children should not be drinking and is endorsed
by the American Medical Association, the National Safety Council, and
the American Association of Poison Control Centers. The entire screening
and testing procedure shall be explained to the test subject prior to
conducting the screening test.

Bitrex™ Fit Test Instructions

a.  Scope

The Bitrex™ fit test is conducted so the person being fit tested can
detect the taste of the Bitrex™ sensitivity solution. Once detection is
confirmed, the person is tested using the Bitrex™ fit test solution with
the respirator to detect breakthrough.

b.  Related Procedures and Other Documents

-   Bitrex™ Qualitative Fit Test Kit Instructions Part No 2041 Allegro
      Industries

-   SDS Bitrex™ Fit Sensitivity Solution #1

-   SDS Bitrex™ Fit Test Solution #2

-   Respirator Fit Test Record (Appendix III)

-   Respirator Protection Training Quiz (Appendix IV)

Equipment

-   Fit test kit

-   Test hood

-   Nebulizer #1 (sensitivity)

-   Nebulizer #2 (fit test)

-   Sensitivity test solution

-   Fit test solution

-   Stopper

-   Canister cartridge

Bitrex™ Fit Test Solution Instructions

a.  Remove sensitivity test solution, and with tip pointed upward, pinch
    along the length of the applicator tube to crush the glass ampoule.

b.  It is important to keep the applicator tip pointed upward when
    pinching the tube to prevent the solution from squirting out during
    the pinching process.

c.  Remove the end cap from the nebulizer, and insert the applicator tip
    into the U section opening of the nebulizer. Squeeze and transfer
    the solution from the applicator into the neck of the nebulizer
    until the applicator is empty.

d.  Do not remove the end tip of the applicator tube. It contains a
    porous filter designed to filter out the crushed glass. The tip
    contains a hole for solution transfer.

e.  Replace the protective end cap on the nebulizer until the test is
    ready to be performed.

f.  Repeat operations 3.a and 3.b for the fit test solution ampoule
    using the appropriate nebulizer.

Bitrex™ Sensitivity Test Instructions

NOTE: The subject should not eat, drink, or chew gum for at least 15
minutes before the test.

a.  Place the hood over the subject without a respirator.

b.  Position the hood forward so there is about six inches between the
    subject’s face and the window. This is important to ensure even
    dispersion of the aerosol and clearance for the respirator during
    the fit test.

c.  Instruct the subject to breathe through their mouth with their
    tongue extended.

d.  Using the sensitive test solution Nebulizer #1 inject the aerosol
    into the hood through the hole in the window.

I.  Inject 10 times, fully squeezing and collapsing the bulb.

II. The nozzle is directed away from the nose and mouth of the person
      being tested.

e.  Ask the subject if they can detect the bitter taste of the solution.

I.  If tasted, note the number of squeezes on the Respirator Fit Test
      Record.

II. All testing results are in groups of 10 and should be noted on the
      paperwork in groups of 10 squeezes.

f.  If the subject does not taste the sensitivity solution, inject an
    additional 10 full squeezes of the aerosol into the hood.

I.  Repeat with 10 more squeezes.

g.  If the Bitrex™ is not tasted after 30 squeezes, the subject is
    unable to taste Bitrex™ and may not perform the fit test.

Bitrex™ Fit Test Work Instructions

a.  Have the subject don and fit check the respirator per the
    manufacturers’ instructions.

I.  Use the particulate filter provided (N95-P100 rating).

b.  Place the hood over the subject with the respirator on.

c.  Position the hood forward so there is about six inches between the
    subject’s face and the window.

d.  This is important to ensure even dispersion of the aerosol and
    clearance for the respirator during the fit test.

e.  Instruct the subject to breathe through their mouth with their
    tongue extended. Using the sensitive test solution Nebulizer #2,
    inject the aerosol into the hood through the hole in the window.

I.  Inject 10 times, fully squeezing and collapsing the bulb.

II. To maintain an adequate concentration of aerosol during this test,
      inject one half of the number of squeezes used in step 5.e.I,
      every 30 seconds.

f.  Ask the subject if they can detect the bitter taste of the solution
    any time during the following exercises for 60 seconds each.

I.  Normal breathing

II. Deep breathing (breaths should be deep and regular)

III. Turning head from side to side- movement should be complete with
       one turn every second

IV. Nodding head up and down (movement should be complete with one turn
      every second)

V.  Talking, reciting the alphabet, or reading aloud a prepared text
      (the “Rainbow Passage” is suggested[10])

VI. Bending over (The test subject shall bend at the waist as if they
      were to touch their toes.)

1)  Jogging in place shall be substituted for this exercise in those
      test environments such as shroud type QNFT or QLFT units that do
      not permit bending over at the waist.

g.  If the entire test is completed without the subject detecting the
    bitter taste of the Bitrex™ aerosol, the test is successful, and the
    respirator fit is deemed adequate.

h.  If the taste of Bitrex™ is detected, the test has failed, and a
    different respirator must be tried. The entire procedure is repeated
    (sensitivity and fit tests).

i.  Enter “pass” or “fail” on the Respirator Fit Test Record.

j.  Have the subject and the trainer sign the document.

Attachment D.2.—OSHA Respiratory Medical Evaluation Questionnaire[11]

To the employer: Answers to questions in Section 1, and to question 9 in
Section 2 of Part A, do not require a medical examination.

To the employee: Can you read (circle one)? YES NO

Your employer must allow you to answer this questionnaire during normal
working hours or at a time and place that is convenient for you. To
maintain your confidentiality, your employer or supervisor must not look
at or review your answers, and your employer must tell you how to
deliver or send this questionnaire to the healthcare professional who
will review it.

Part A. Section 1 (Mandatory)

The following information must be provided by every employee who has
been selected to use any type of respirator (please print):

1.  Today’s date: ________

2.  Your name: ______________________________________

3.  Your age (to nearest year): ________

4.  Sex (circle one): Male Female

5.  Your height: ____ feet ____ inches

6.  Your weight: ____ pounds

7.  Your job title: ___________________________________________

8.  A phone number where you can be reached by the health care
    professional who reviews this questionnaire (include the area code):
    (____) ____-______

9.  The best time to phone you at this number: ________

10. Has your employer told you how to contact the health care
    professional who will review this questionnaire (circle one)? YES NO

11. Check the type of respirator you will use (you can check more than
    one category):

    -   N, R, or P disposable respirator (filter-mask, non- cartridge
        type only)

    -   Other type (for example, half- or full-facepiece type,
        powered-air purifying, supplied-air, self-contained breathing
        apparatus)

12. Have you worn a respirator (circle one)? YES NO

    a.  If “yes,” what type(s): ______________________

Part A. Section 2 (Mandatory)

Questions 1 through 9 below must be answered by every employee who has
been selected to use any type of respirator (please check “yes” or “no”)

+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 15. Do you currently smoke tobacco, or have you smoked     | YES NO |
|     tobacco in the last month?                             |        |
+============================================================+========+
| 1.  Have you ever had any of the following conditions?     |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Seizures (fits):                                       | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Diabetes (sugar disease):                              | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Allergic reactions that interfere with your breathing: | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  Claustrophobia (fear of closed-in places):             | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| e.  Trouble smelling odors:                                | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 2.  Have you ever had any of the following pulmonary or    |        |
|     lung problems?                                         |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Asbestosis:                                            | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Asthma:                                                | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Chronic bronchitis:                                    | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  Emphysema:                                             | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| e.  Pneumonia:                                             | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| f.  Tuberculosis:                                          | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| g.  Silicosis:                                             | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| h.  Pneumothorax (collapsed lung):                         | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| i.  Lung cancer:                                           | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| j.  Broken ribs:                                           | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| k.  Any chest injuries or surgeries:                       | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| l.  Any other lung problem that you’ve been told about:    | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 3.  Do you currently have any of the following symptoms of |        |
|     pulmonary or lung illness?                             |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Shortness of breath:                                   | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Shortness of breath when walking fast on level ground  | YES NO |
|       or walking up a slight hill or incline:              |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Shortness of breath when walking with other people at  | YES NO |
|       an ordinary pace on level ground:                    |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  Have to stop for breath when walking at your own pace  | YES NO |
|       on level ground:                                     |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| e.  Shortness of breath when washing or dressing yourself: | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| f.  Shortness of breath that interferes with your job:     | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| g.  Coughing that produces phlegm (thick sputum):          | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| h.  Coughing that wakes you early in the morning:          | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| i.  Coughing that occurs mostly when you are lying down:   | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| j.  Coughing up blood in the last month:                   | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| k.  Wheezing:                                              | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| l.  Wheezing that interferes with your job:                | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| m.  Chest pain when you breathe deeply:                    | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| n.  Any other symptoms that you think may be related to    | YES NO |
|       lung problems:                                       |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 4.  Have you ever had any of the following cardiovascular  |        |
|     or heart problems?                                     |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Heart attack:                                          | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Stroke:                                                | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Angina:                                                | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  Heart failure:                                         | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| e.  Swelling in your legs or feet (not caused by walking): | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| f.  Heart arrhythmia (heart beating irregularly):          | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| g.  High blood pressure:                                   | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| h.  Any other heart problem that you’ve been told about:   | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 5.  Have you ever had any of the following cardiovascular  |        |
|     or heart symptoms?                                     |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Frequent pain or tightness in your chest:              | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Pain or tightness in your chest during physical        | YES NO |
|       activity:                                            |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Pain or tightness in your chest that interferes with   | YES NO |
|       your job:                                            |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  In the past two years, have you noticed your heart     | YES NO |
|       skipping or missing a beat:                          |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| e.  Heartburn or indigestion that is not related to        | YES NO |
|       eating:                                              |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| f.  Any other symptoms that you think may be related to    | YES NO |
|       heart or circulation problems:                       |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 6.  Do you currently take medication for any of the        |        |
|     following problems?                                    |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Breathing or lung problems:                            | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Heart trouble:                                         | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Blood pressure:                                        | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  Seizures (fits):                                       | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 7.  I f you’ve used a respirator, have you ever had any of |        |
|     the following problems? (If you’ve never used a        |        |
|     respirator, check the following space and go to        |        |
|     question 9.):                                          |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Eye irritation:                                        | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Skin allergies or rashes:                              | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Anxiety:                                               | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  General weakness or fatigue:                           | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| e.  Any other problem that interferes with your use of a   | YES NO |
|       respirator:                                          |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 8.  Would you like to talk to the health care professional | YES NO |
|     who will review this questionnaire about your answers  |        |
|     to this questionnaire?                                 |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Questions 10 to 15 below must be answered by every         |        |
| employee who has been selected to use either a             |        |
| full-facepiece respirator or a self-contained breathing    |        |
| apparatus (SCBA). For employees who have been selected to  |        |
| use other types of respirators, answering these questions  |        |
| is voluntary.                                              |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 9.  Have you ever lost vision in either eye (temporarily   | YES NO |
|     or permanently)?                                       |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 10. Do you currently have any of the following vision      |        |
|     problems?                                              |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Wear contact lenses:                                   | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Wear glasses:                                          | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Color blind:                                           | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  Any other eye or vision problem:                       | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 11. Have you ever had an injury to your ears, including a  | YES NO |
|     broken ear drum?                                       |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 12. Do you currently have any of the following hearing     |        |
|     problems?                                              |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Difficulty hearing:                                    | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Wear a hearing aid:                                    | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Any other hearing or ear problem:                      | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 13. Have you ever had a back injury?                       | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 14. Do you currently have any of the following             |        |
|     musculoskeletal problems?                              |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| a.  Weakness in any of your arms, hands, legs, or feet:    | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| b.  Back pain:                                             | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| c.  Difficulty fully moving your arms and legs:            | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| d.  Pain or stiffness when you lean forward or backward at | YES NO |
|       the waist:                                           |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| e.  Difficulty fully moving your head up or down:          | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| f.  Difficulty fully moving your head side to side:        | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| g.  Difficulty bending at your knees:                      | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| h.  Difficulty squatting to the ground:                    | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| i.  Climbing a flight of stairs or a ladder carrying more  | YES NO |
|       than 25 lbs:                                         |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| j.  Any other muscle or skeletal problem that interferes   | YES NO |
|       with using a respirator:                             |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+

Attachment D.3.—Respirator Fit Test Record (Qualitative)

Name: Date:

Job: Glasses worn:

Facial hair, other:

Test media: Bitrex™ Saccharin

+-------------------------------------+---+---+
| Respirator Type                     | A | B |
+=====================================+===+===+
| Compatible with eye glasses         |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
| Test Exercises                      |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Head stationary, normal breathing |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Head stationary, deep breathing   |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Head turning side to side         |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Head moving up and down           |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Talking (rainbow passage)         |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
| Comfort                             |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Very comfortable                  |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Comfortable                       |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Barely comfortable                |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Uncomfortable                     |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
|   Intolerable                       |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+
| Pass/Fail                           |   |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+---+

Assigned equipment: A

  Manufacturer: ______________________ Model: _____________________
  Size: ________

Assigned equipment: B

  Manufacturer: ______________________ Model: _____________________
  Size: ________

Tested by:

  Print name:

  Signature:

  Signature of trainee:

Attachment D.4.—Respirator Protection Training—QUIZ

Name: Date:

Circle the correct answer.

+--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| 7.  A positive and negative pressure check should be   | TRUE FALSE |
|     conducted each time the respirator is worn.        |            |
+========================================================+============+
| 1.  A dust mask is adequate protection against         | TRUE FALSE |
|     solvents.                                          |            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| 2.  Respirators should be cleaned on a daily basis.    | TRUE FALSE |
+--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| 3.  The only adequate protection against MDI is from   | TRUE FALSE |
|     the dual-cartridge respirator.                     |            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| 4.  A respirator can be borrowed from a co-worker in   | TRUE FALSE |
|     the event that your respirator is not available.   |            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| 5.  In order to assure a proper fit, clean shaven skin | TRUE FALSE |
|     must be in contact with all respirator skin        |            |
|     sealing surfaces at all times.                     |            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| 6.  Air-purifying respirators (APRs) can be worn for   | TRUE FALSE |
|     protection against MDI vapor or mist during spray  |            |
|     foam applications.                                 |            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+------------+

APPENDIX E:

HEARING CONSERVATION PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.95

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE

2.  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES

    a.  Program Administrator

    b.  Program Applicability

3.  PROGRAM ELEMENTS

    a.  Noise Monitoring

    b.  Work Areas for HCP

    c.  Audiometric Testing

    d.  Hearing Protection

    e.  Noise Signs

    f.  Employee Training

4.  DOCUMENTATION AND RECORDKEEPING

ATTACHMENT E.1.—Sample Noise Exposure Measurement Log

ATTACHMENT E.2.—Sample Hearing Conservation Training Record

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

The [Company Name] Hearing Protection Program is designed to protect
employees by establishing accepted practices to protect employee’s
hearing and effectively manage or eliminate hazardous noise exposures.
Based upon monitoring results, a continuing Hearing Conservation Program
(HCP) is established to meet these objectives.

PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Program Administrator

The Program Administrator at [Company Name] is the [Health and Safety
Officer Title]. The Program Administrator is responsible for
administering the hearing protection program. Duties of the program
administrator include:

-   Coordination and supervision of noise exposure monitoring

-   Identification of employees to be included in the HCP

-   Coordination and supervision of audiometric program

-   Supervision of hearing protector selection

-   Development of policies relating to the use of hearing protectors

-   Supervision of employee training programs

-   Coordination and supervision of record keeping

-   Evaluation of overall program

Program Applicability

All employees assigned or working in designated noise areas whose noise
exposures equal or exceed the action level of 85 dBA (8-hour time
weighted average) will be included in the program. These exposures will
be determined by actual monitoring or with representative data.
Employees are required to fully participate in the program outlined in
this policy as a condition of employment. Employees must wear the
provided ear protection devices when working in posted noise areas. Each
employee exposed to sound levels in excess of 85, will be:

-   Given a baseline audiogram prior to assignment and an annual
      audiogram thereafter (The testing is provided at no cost to the
      employee.)

-   Provided with a choice of suitable ear protectors, fitted and
      encouraged to use them. (Wearing of ear protection is mandatory
      for employees working in areas where noise exposure exceeds 90 dBA
      (8-hour time-weighted average).)

-   Notified of the results of noise exposure monitoring when their
      exposure is determined to be 85 dBA (8 hour time weighted average)
      or greater

-   Notified of any abnormal audiogram indicating a standard threshold
      shift

-   Provided annual training and information

PROGRAM ELEMENTS

Noise Monitoring

A noise survey indicated that noise levels exceeding 85 dBA were
measured on specific jobs. The noise exposure levels and areas or
sources are summarized below in Attachment E.1. Additional noise
monitoring will be conducted whenever employee exposures are expected to
change (equipment changes, plant modifications, engineering control
installations, etc.)

Work Areas for HCP

Employees in the following areas will be included in the Hearing
Conservation Program:

{Enter information—in warehouse, rig, on noisy jobsite, etc.}

Affected employees or employee representatives will be notified of
planned monitoring by the program administrator and permitted to
observe. Employee observation of monitoring will not disrupt normal work
activities.

Audiometric Testing

Baseline and annual audiometric testing will be performed. A copy of the
standard will be provided to the testing center. The testing center will
provide or make available records regarding the background sound
pressure levels in their audiometric testing rooms.

New employees in noisy areas positions listed above will be provided
with appropriate audiometric examinations (baseline or annual) within
{number} days of employment. Exposure to workplace noise is not allowed
for 14 hours prior to baseline examinations (ear protectors may be used
in lieu of 14 hours noise-free). Audiometric testing results provided by
the resting center will be reviewed to ensure the appropriate follow-up
actions are taken.

If a standard threshold shift (an average shift in either ear of 10 dB
or more at 2,000, 3,000 or 4,000 Hz) is identified, the employee will
be:

-   Notified of the threshold shift within 21 days of this determination

-   Informed of the need for further evaluation or retesting if a
      medical problem is suspected

-   Required to wear hearing protection

-   Refitted or retrained in the use of hearing protection

-   Referred for additional audiological or medical testing, if
      appropriate, and informed of the need for this testing, the
      purpose and outcome, and whether shift may not be related to use
      of hearing protectors

Hearing Protection

Hearing protection is required to be worn by employees in the following
job positions (exposure exceeds 90 dBA, 8-hour-time weighted average):

{List job positions.}

Noise Signs

Company policy requires all work areas where noise exposures may exceed
85dBA to be posted with noise warning signs at all entrances to these
areas. All employees in the HCP will wear ear protection when working in
posted areas.

Employee Training

Participation in an annual training program is required for employees
exposed to noise at or above 85 dBA. The training will include
information on:

-   The effects of noise on hearing

-   The purpose and use of hearing protectors, the advantages and
      disadvantages of the various types

-   Instructions in selection, fitting, use, and care of hearing
      protectors

-   The purpose of audiometric testing and an explanation of test
      procedures

-   Contents of 29 CFR 1910.95, Occupational Noise Exposure

-   Contents of 29 CFR 1910.20, Access to Medical and Exposure Records

  A copy of the noise standard and the written training and
  instructional materials are attached and are made available to
  employees upon request. Records of training will be maintained in
  Attachment E.2.

DOCUMENTATION AND RECORDKEEPING

Audiometric program records are maintained in the employee’s personnel
file and will be provided to employees upon request. Records applicable
to employee monitoring and exposure records will be retained as follows:

-   Employee audiometric test records (baseline and annual audiogram,
    retests, test room background levels, and audiometer calibration
    records) are maintained for the duration of affected employees’
    employment.

-   Noise exposure measurement records are maintained for two years.

ATTACHMENT E.1.—Sample Noise Exposure Measurement Log

  Location   Operation   Date   Exposure Level (dBA)
  ---------- ----------- ------ ----------------------
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                

ATTACHMENT E.2.—Sample Hearing Conservation Training Record

  Date   Employee   Topic   Trainer
  ------ ---------- ------- ---------
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            

APPENDIX F:

CONTROL OF HAZARDOUS ENERGY

(LOCK-OUT/TAG-OUT) PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.147

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE

2.  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

3.  PROGRAM ELEMENTS

    a.  Preparation for Lock-out or Tag-out

    b.  Electrical

    c.  Hydraulic and Pneumatic

    d.  Fluids and Gases

    e.  Mechanical Energy

    f.  Release from Lock-out/Tag-out

    g.  Service or Maintenance Involving More than One Person

    h.  Removal of an Authorized Employee’s Lock-out/Tag-out by the
        Company

    i.  Shift or Personnel Changes

    j.  Procedures for Outside Personnel and Contractors

    k.  Training and Communication

    l.  Periodic Inspection

Attachment F.1.—List of Authorized Personnel for Lock-out/Tag-out
Procedures

Attachment F.2.—Certification of Training of (Authorized Personnel)

Attachment F.3.—Certification of Training of (Affected Personnel)

Attachment F.4.—Lock-out/Tag-out Inspection Certification

Attachment F.5.—Lock-out/Tag-out Energy Control Procedures SPECIFIC TO
EACH MACHINE

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

The objective of this procedure is to establish a means of positive
control to prevent the accidental starting or activating of machinery or
systems while they are being repaired, cleaned, or serviced. This
program serves to:

-   Establish a safe and positive means of shutting down machinery,
    equipment, and systems.

-   Prohibit unauthorized personnel or remote control systems from
    starting machinery or equipment while it is being serviced.

-   Provide a secondary control system (tag-out) when it is impossible
    to positively lock-out the machinery or equipment.

-   Establish responsibility for implementing and controlling
    lock-out/tag-out procedures.

-   Ensure that only approved locks, standardized tags, and fastening
    devices provided by the company will be utilized in the
    lock-out/tag-out procedures.

PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

Program Administrator Responsibilities

The Program Administrator at [Company Name] is the [Health and Safety
Officer Title]. The Program Administrator is responsible for
administering the lock-out/tag-out program. Duties of the program
administrator include:

-   Implementing the lock-out/tag-out program

-   Enforcing the program and insuring compliance with the procedures in
      their departments

-   Monitoring the compliance of this procedure and conducting the
      annual inspection and certification of the authorized employees

Employee Responsibility

Only authorized employees (those listed in Attachment F.1) are
responsible for following established lock-out/tag-out procedures.

-   Affected employees (all other employees in the facility) are
      responsible for ensuring they do not attempt to restart or
      re-energize machines or equipment that are locked out or tagged
      out.

PROGRAM ELEMENTS 

The ensuing items are to be followed to ensure both compliance with the
OSHA Control of Hazardous Energy Standard and the safety of our
employees.

Preparation for Lock-out or Tag-out

Employees who are required to utilize the lock-out/tag-out procedure
(see employee list in Attachment F.1) must be knowledgeable of the
different energy sources and the proper sequence of shutting off or
disconnecting energy means. The four types of energy sources are:

-   Electrical (most common form)

-   Hydraulic and pneumatic

-   Fluids and gases

-   Mechanical (including gravity)

  More than one energy source may be used on some equipment, and the
  proper procedure must be followed in order to identify energy sources
  and lock-out/tag-out accordingly. See Attachment F.5 for the specific
  procedure format.

Electrical

I.  Shut off power at machine and disconnect.

II. Disconnecting means must be locked or tagged.

III. Press start button to see that correct systems are locked out.

IV. All controls must be returned to their safest position.

  Remember these points:

-   If a machine or piece of equipment contains capacitors, they must be
      drained of stored energy.

-   Possible disconnecting means include the power cord, power panels
      (look for primary and secondary voltage), breakers, the operator's
      station, motor circuit, relays, limit switches, and electrical
      interlocks.

-   Some equipment may have a motor-isolating shut-off and a
      control-isolating shut-off.

-   If the electrical energy is disconnected by simply unplugging the
      power cord, the cord must be kept under the control of the
      authorized employee or the plug end of the cord must be locked out
      or tagged out.

Hydraulic and Pneumatic

I.  Shut off all energy sources (pumps and compressors). If the pumps
      and compressors supply energy to more than one piece of equipment,
      lock-out or tag-out the valve supplying energy to the piece of
      equipment being serviced.

II. Stored pressure from hydraulic and pneumatic lines shall be drained
      and bled when release of stored energy could cause injury to
      employees.

III. Make sure controls are returned to their safest position (off,
       stop, standby, inch, jog, etc.).

Fluids and Gases

I.  Identify the type of fluid or gas and the necessary personal
      protective equipment.

II. Close valves to prevent flow, and lock-out/tag-out.

III. Determine the isolating device, and then close and
       lock-out/tag-out.

IV. Drain and bleed lines to zero energy state.

V.  Some systems may have electrically controlled valves. If so, they
      must be shut off and locked-out/tagged out.

VI. Check for zero energy state at the equipment.

Mechanical Energy

Mechanical energy includes gravity activation, energy stored in springs,
etc.

I.  Block out, or use die ram safety chain.

II. Lock-out or tag-out safety device.

III. Shut off and lock-out or tag-out the electrical system.

IV. Check for zero energy state.

V.  Return controls to their safest position.

Release from Lock-out/Tag-out

I.  Inspection: Make certain the work is completed, and inventory the
      tools and equipment that were used.

II. Clean-up: Remove all towels, rags, work-aids, etc.

III. Replace guards: Replace all guards possible. Sometimes a particular
       guard may have to be left off until the start sequence is over
       due to possible adjustments. However, all other guards should be
       put back into place.

IV. Check controls: All controls should be in their safest position.

V.  The work area shall be checked to ensure that all employees have
      been safely positioned or removed and have been notified that the
      lock-out/tag-out devices are being removed.

VI. Remove locks and tags. Remove only your lock or tag.

Service or Maintenance Involving More than One Person

When servicing or maintenance is performed by more than one person, each
authorized employee shall place his or her own lock or tag on the
energy-isolating source. This shall be done by utilizing a multiple lock
scissors clamp if the equipment is capable of being locked out. If the
equipment cannot be locked out, then each authorized employee must place
his tag on the equipment.

Removal of an Authorized Employee’s Lock-out/Tag-out by the Company

Each location must develop written emergency procedures that comply with
1910.147(e)(3) to be utilized at that location. Emergency procedures for
removing lock-out/tag-out should include the following:

I.  Verification by employer that the authorized employee who applied
      the device is not in the facility.

II. Make reasonable efforts to advise the employee that his or her
      device has been removed. (This can be done when he or she returns
      to the facility).

III. Ensure that the authorized employee has this knowledge before he or
       she resumes work at the facility.

Shift or Personnel Changes

Each facility must develop written procedures based on specific needs
and capabilities. Each procedure must specify how the continuity of
lock-out or tag-out protection will be ensured at all times. See
1910.147(e)(4).

Procedures for Outside Personnel and Contractors

Outside personnel and contractors shall be advised that the company has
and enforces the use of lock-out/tag-out procedures. They will be
informed of the use of locks and tags and notified about the prohibition
of attempts to restart or re-energize machines or equipment that are
locked out or tagged out.

The company will obtain information from the outside personnel or
contractor about their lock-out/tag-out procedures and will advise
affected employees of this information.

The outside personnel or contractor will be required to sign a
certification form. If the outside personnel or contractor has
previously signed a certification that is on file, additional signed
certification is not necessary.

Training and Communication

Each authorized employee who will be utilizing the lock-out/tag-out
procedure will be trained in the recognition of applicable hazardous
energy sources, type and magnitude of energy available in the work
place, and the methods and means necessary for energy isolation and
control.

Each affected employee (all employees other than authorized employees
utilizing the lock-out/tag-out procedure) shall be instructed in the
purpose and use of the lock-out/tag-out procedure, and the prohibition
of attempts to restart or re-energize machines or equipment that are
locked out or tagged out.

Training will be certified using Attachment F.2 (Authorized Personnel)
or Attachment F.3 (Affected Personnel). The certifications will be
retained in the employee personnel files.

Periodic Inspection

A periodic inspection (at least annually) will be conducted of each
authorized employee under the lock-out/tag-out procedure. This
inspection shall be performed by the {responsible person}. If the
{responsible person} is also using the energy control procedure being
inspected, then the inspection shall be performed by another party.

The inspection will include a review between the inspector and each
authorized employee of that employee's responsibilities under the energy
control (lock-out/tag-out) procedure. The inspection will also consist
of a physical inspection of the authorized employee while performing
work under the procedures.

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] shall certify in writing that the
inspection has been performed. The written certification (Attachment
F.4) shall be retained in the individual's personnel file. The
{responsible person} shall be trained at the Authorized Level.

ATTACHMENT F.1.—List of Authorized Personnel For Lock-out/Tag-out Procedures

  Name   Job Title
  ------ -----------
         
         
         
         
         
         
         

ATTACHMENT F.2.—Certification of Training (Authorized Personnel)

I certify that I have received training as an authorized employee under
[Company Name] Lock-Out/Tag-Out Program. I further certify that I
understand the procedures and will abide by those procedures.

___________________________________ ________________________

AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE DATE

ATTACHMENT F.3.—Certification of Training (Affected Personnel)

I certify that I have received training as an affected employee under
[Company Name] Lock-Out/Tag-Out Program. I further certify and
understand that I am prohibited from attempting to restart or
re-energize machines or equipment that are locked out or tagged out.

___________________________________ ________________________

AFFECTED EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE DATE

ATTACHMENT F.4.—Lock-out/Tag-out Inspection Certification

I certify that {equipment} was inspected on this date utilizing
lock-out/tag-out procedures. The inspection was performed while working
on {equipment}.

___________________________________ ________________________

AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE DATE

___________________________________ ________________________

INSPECTOR’S SIGNATURE DATE

ATTACHMENT F.5.—Lock-out/Tag-out Energy Control Procedures Specific to Each Machine

{NOTE: SPF Contractors should consider making a separate LOTO procedure
for each proportioner, generator, and compressor used.}

Preparation for Shut Down

a.  Identify equipment to be shut down:

b.  Location in facility:

c.  Procedures to notify all affected employees:

d.  Identify all power sources:

I.  Electrical:

II. Air:

III. Steam:

IV. Hydraulic:

V.  Gravity:

VI. Other:

e.  Identify lock-out/tag-out devices to be used:

Shut Down

Description of the shut down procedures:

Isolation

Procedures for isolation of equipment from all power sources:

Lock-out/Tag-out Device Application

Procedure for locking out or tagging out equipment:

Release of Stored Energy

Procedures for the release of stored energy (where applicable):

Verification of Isolation

Procedures to ensure that equipment is isolated from all power sources:

Start-Up

a.  Visually inspect the machine and equipment. Ensure all tools have
    been removed. Return guards to place.

b.  Notify all affected employees and other employees of the start up.

c.  Remove all lock-out/tag-out devices, and restore power.

APPENDIX G:

EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN (EAP)

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.38

{Complete for each jobsite.}

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

table of contents

1.  COMPANY INFORMATION

2.  ALERTS

3.  POLICY

4.  ROUTES

5.  FIRE EXTINGUISHERS

6.  OPERATIONS

7.  DUTIES

8.  ASSEMBLY

9.  ACCOUNTING

10. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Company Information

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

Company Contact:

Name: [Health and Safety Officer Name], the

Title: [Health and Safety Officer Title]

Telephone or Cell:

Email:

Alerts 

In the event of an emergency, employees are alerted by:

-   The sounding of an alarm

-   Verbal announcement

Identify the emergency signal for each emergency situation (i.e.,
earthquake, fire, general evacuation):

Policy 

In the event of fire or other emergency, ALL employees shall evacuate
immediately.

Routes

In the event of an emergency, employees shall evacuate by means of the
nearest available marked exit.

Fire Extinguishers 

In the event of a fire, the following individuals are authorized to use
portable fire extinguishers to attempt to extinguish fires before
evacuating:

{Enter the names of those trained to use fire extinguishers.}

Operations

In the event of an emergency, the following employees are to remain in
the workplace to shutdown or monitor critical operations before they
evacuate:

{List the employees to remain during shutdown.}

Duties: 

The following employees are to perform rescue or medical duties during
an emergency:

{List qualified EMR personnel, if any.}

Assembly

After an emergency evacuation, employees are to gather in the following
location(s):

{Enter gathering locations.}

Accounting 

After an emergency evacuation, the procedure for accounting for all
employees is:

{Perform employee roll call.}

Additional Information

{Enter additional evacuation plan and procedures.}

APPENDIX H:

FALL PROTECTION PLAN

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1926 Subpart M Appendix E

{Complete for each jobsite.}

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  SPECIFIC JOB INFORMATION

2.  FALL HAZARDS IN THE WORK AREA

3.  METHOD OF FALL ARREST OR FALL RESTRAINT

4.  ASSEMBLY, MAINTENANCE, INSPECTION, AND DISASSEMBLY PROCEDURE

5.  HANDLING, STORAGE, AND SECURING OF TOOLS AND MATERIAL

6.  OVERHEAD PROTECTION

7.  INJURED WORKER REMOVAL

8.  TRAINING AND INSTRUCTION PROGRAM

SPECIFIC JOB INFORMATION

Company Name: [Company Name]

Job Name: Date:

Job Address: City:

Job Foreman: Jobsite Phone:

FALL HAZARDS IN THE WORK AREA

Include location and dimensions for each hazard.

Elevator shaft: Stairwell:

Leading edge: Window opening:

Outside static line: Roof eave height:

Perimeter edge: Roof perimeter dimensions:

Other fall hazards in the work area:

METHOD OF FALL ARREST OR FALL RESTRAINT

{For fall protection equipment, include details, such as manufacturer,
etc.}

Full body harness:

Body belt (restraint only):

Lanyard:

Dropline:

Lifeline:

Restraint line:

Horizontal lifeline:

Rope grab:

Deceleration device:

Shock absorbing lanyard:

Locking snap hooks:

Safety nets:

Guard rails:

Anchorage points:

Catch platform:

Scaffolding platform:

Safety monitor:

Name of monitor, if used:

Other:

ASSEMBLY, MAINTENANCE, INSPECTION, AND DISASSEMBLY PROCEDURE

Assembly and disassembly of all equipment will be done according to
manufacturers’ recommended procedures. {Include copies of manufacturer’s
data for each specific type of equipment used.}

Specific types of equipment on the job are:

A visual inspection of all safety equipment will be done daily or before
each use, as stated in the Employee Training Packet. Any defective
equipment will be tagged and removed from use immediately. The
manufacturer’s recommendations for maintenance and inspection will be
followed.

HANDLING, STORAGE, and SECURING OF TOOLS AND MATERIAL

Toe boards will be installed on all scaffolding to prevent tools and
equipment from falling from scaffolding.

Other specific handling, storage, and securing instruction is as
follows:

OVERHEAD PROTECTION

Hard hats are required on all job sites with the exception of those that
have no exposure to overhead hazards. Warning signs will be posted to
caution of existing hazards whenever they are present. In some cases,
debris nets may be used if a condition warrants additional protection.

Additional overhead protection will include:

Toe boards (at least four inches in height) will be installed along the
edge of scaffolding and walking surfaces for a distance sufficient to
protect employees below. Where tools, equipment, or materials are piled
higher than the top of the toe board, paneling or screening will be
erected to protect employees below.

INJURED WORKER REMOVAL

Normal first aid procedures should be performed as the situation arises.
If the area is safe for entry, the first aid should be done by a foreman
or other certified individual.

Initiate Emergency Services—dial 911 (where available)

Phone location:

First aid location:

Elevator location:

Crane location:

Other: Location:

Rescue considerations: When personal fall arrest systems are used, the
employer must assure that employees can be promptly rescued or can
rescue themselves should a fall occur. The availability of rescue
personnel, ladders, or other rescue equipment should be evaluated. In
some situations, equipment that allows employees to rescue themselves
after the fall has been arrested may be desirable, such as devices that
have descent capability.

Describe methods to be used for the removal of the injured worker(s):

TRAINING AND INSTRUCTION PROGRAM

All new employees will be given instructions on the proper use of fall
protection devices before they begin work. They will sign a form stating
they have been given this information. This form becomes part of the
employee’s personnel file.

The written fall protection work plan will be reviewed before work
begins on the job site. Those employees attending will sign below. The
fall protection equipment use will be reviewed regularly at the weekly
safety meetings.

Foreman or Job Superintendent: Date:

Prior to permitting employees into areas where fall hazards exist, all
employees must be trained regarding fall protection work plan
requirements. Inspection of fall protection devices/systems must be made
to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations.

APPENDIX I:

JOBSITE FIRE PREVENTION PLAN

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1926.24

{Complete for Each Jobsite.}

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE

2.  COMPANY POLICY

3.  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

    a.  Employer

    b.  Plan Administrator

    c.  Project Manager Responsibilities

    d.  Employee Responsibilities

4.  PLAN ELEMENTS

    a.  Good Housekeeping

    b.  Maintenance

5.  TYPES OF HAZARDS

    a.  Electrical Fire Hazards

    b.  Portable Heaters

    c.  Office Fire Hazards

    d.  Cutting, Welding, and Open Flame Work

    e.  Flammable and Combustible Materials

    f.  Smoking

6.  TRAINING

7.  PROGRAM EVALUATION

ATTACHMENT I.1.—Fire Risk Survey

ATTACHMENT I.2.—General Fire Prevention Checklist

ATTACHMENT I.3.—Exits Checklist

ATTACHMENT I.4.—Flammable and Combustible Material Checklist

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

The purpose of this Fire Prevention Plan is to eliminate the causes of
fire, prevent loss of life and property by fire, and to comply with the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s (OSHA) standard on fire
prevention, 29 CFR 1910.39. It provides employees with information and
guidelines that will assist them in recognizing, reporting, and
controlling fire hazards.

COMPANY POLICY

[Company Name] is committed to minimizing the threat of fire to
employees, visitors, and property. [Company Name] complies with all
applicable laws, regulations, codes, and good practices pertaining to
fire prevention. {Facility name’s} separate Emergency Action Plan spells
out the procedures for responding to fires. This Fire Prevention Plan
serves to reduce the risk of fires at [Company Name] {location} in the
following ways:

-   Identifies materials that are potential fire hazards and their
    proper handling and storage procedures

-   Distinguishes potential ignition sources and the proper control
    procedures of those materials

-   Describes fire protection equipment and systems used to control fire
    hazards

-   Identifies persons responsible for maintaining the equipment and
    systems installed to prevent or control ignition of fires

-   Identifies persons responsible for the control and accumulation of
    flammable or combustible material

-   Describes good housekeeping procedures necessary to ensure the
    control of accumulated flammable and combustible waste material and
    residues to avoid a fire emergency

-   Provides training to employees with regard to fire hazards to which
    they may be exposed

PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

Fire safety is everyone's responsibility. All employees should know how
to prevent and respond to fires, and all are responsible for adhering to
company policy regarding fire emergencies.

Employer

Management determines the [Company Name] fire prevention and protection
policies. Management will provide adequate controls to provide a safe
workplace and will provide adequate resources and training to its
employees to encourage fire prevention and the safest possible response
in the event of a fire emergency.

Plan Administrator

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] administers the Fire Prevention
Plan for [Company Name]. He or she shall manage the Fire Prevention
Plan, and shall maintain all records pertaining to the plan. The Plan
Administrator shall also:

-   Develop and administer the [Company Name] fire prevention training
      program.

-   Ensure that fire control equipment and systems are properly
      maintained.

-   Control fuel source hazards.

-   Conduct fire risk surveys (see Attachment I.1.) and make
      recommendations.

Project Manager Responsibilities

Project Managers are responsible for ensuring that employees receive
appropriate fire safety training and for notifying the [Health and
Safety Officer Title] when changes in operation increase the risk of
fire. Supervisors are also responsible for enforcing [Company Name] fire
prevention and protection policies.

Employee Responsibilities

All employees shall:

-   Complete all required training before working without supervision.

-   Conduct operations safely to limit the risk of fire.

-   Report potential fire hazards to their supervisors.

-   Follow fire emergency procedures.

PLAN ELEMENTS

Good Housekeeping

To limit the risk of fires, employees shall take the following
precautions:

-   Minimize the storage of combustible materials.

-   Make sure that doors, hallways, stairs, and other exit routes are
      kept free of obstructions.

-   Dispose of combustible waste in covered, airtight, metal containers.

-   Use and store flammable materials in well-ventilated areas away from
      ignition sources.

-   Use only nonflammable cleaning products.

-   Keep incompatible (i.e., chemically reactive) substances away from
      each other.

-   Perform “hot work” (i.e., welding or working with an open flame or
      other ignition sources) in controlled and well-ventilated areas.

-   Keep equipment in good working order (i.e., inspect electrical
      wiring and appliances regularly, and keep motors and machine tools
      free of dust and grease).

-   Ensure that heating units are safeguarded.

-   Report all gas leaks immediately. Project Manager, Jobsite Foreman
      or Master Installer shall ensure that all gas leaks are repaired
      immediately upon notification.

-   Repair and clean up flammable liquid leaks immediately.

-   Keep work areas free of dust, lint, sawdust, scraps, and similar
      material.

-   Do not rely on extension cords if wiring improvements are needed,
      and take care not to overload circuits with multiple pieces of
      equipment.

-   Ensure that required hot work permits are obtained.

-   Turn off electrical equipment when not in use.

-   Properly dispose of all SPF test samples created during equipment
      set-up. Materials sprayed during daily set-up can generate high
      exothermic temperatures that can ignite SPF or surrounding
      materials. Excessively thick samples should never be placed in
      dumpsters or trash bins, and should always be broken into smaller
      pieces and allowed to cool before removing them from the jobsite
      at the end of the day.

Maintenance

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] will ensure that equipment is
maintained according to manufacturers' specifications. [Company Name]
will also comply with requirements of the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) codes for specific equipment. Only properly trained
individuals shall perform maintenance work.

The following equipment is subject to the maintenance, inspection, and
testing procedures:

-   Equipment installed to detect fuel leaks, control heating, and
      control pressurized systems

-   Portable fire extinguishers, automatic sprinkler systems, and fixed
      extinguishing systems

-   Detection systems for smoke, heat, or flame

-   Fire alarm systems

-   Emergency backup systems and the equipment they support

TYPES OF HAZARDS

The following sections address the major workplace fire hazards at
[Company Name] facilities and the procedures for [Company Street
Address], [Company City, State Zip] controlling the hazards.

Electrical Fire Hazards

Electrical system failures and the misuse of electrical equipment are
leading causes of workplace fires. Fires can result from loose ground
connections, wiring with frayed insulation, or overloaded fuses,
circuits, motors, or outlets.

To prevent electrical fires, employees shall:

-   Replace worn wires.

-   Use only appropriately rated fuses.

-   Never use extension cords as substitutes for wiring improvements.

-   Use only approved extension cords (i.e., those with the Underwriters
      Laboratory (UL) or Factory Mutual (FM) label).

-   Check wiring in hazardous locations where the risk of fire is
      especially high.

-   Check electrical equipment to ensure that it is either properly
      grounded or double insulated.

-   Ensure adequate spacing while performing maintenance.

Portable Heaters

All portable heaters shall be approved by the [Health and Safety Officer
Title]. Portable electric heaters shall have tip-over protection that
automatically shuts off the unit when it is tipped over. There shall be
adequate clearance between the heater and combustible furnishings or
other materials at all times.

Office Fire Hazards

Fire risks are not limited to [Company Name] industrial facilities or
jobsites. Fires in offices have become more likely because of the
increased use of electrical equipment, such as computers and fax
machines. To prevent office fires, employees shall:

-   Avoid overloading circuits with office equipment.

-   Turn off nonessential electrical equipment at the end of each
      workday.

-   Keep storage areas clear of rubbish.

-   Ensure that extension cords are not placed under carpets.

-   Ensure that trash and paper set aside for recycling is not allowed
      to accumulate.

Cutting, Welding, and Open Flame Work

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] will ensure the following:

-   All necessary hot work permits have been obtained prior to work
      beginning.

-   Cutting and welding are done by authorized personnel in designated
      cutting and welding areas whenever possible.

-   Adequate ventilation is provided.

-   Torches, regulators, pressure-reducing valves, and manifolds are UL
      listed or FM approved.

-   Oxygen-fuel gas systems are equipped with listed and approved
      backflow valves and pressure-relief devices.

-   Cutters, welders, and helpers are wearing eye protection and
      protective clothing as appropriate.

-   Cutting or welding is prohibited in sprinkler-protected areas while
      sprinkler protection is out of service.

-   Cutting or welding is prohibited in areas where explosive
      atmospheres of gases, vapors, or dusts could develop from residues
      or accumulations in confined spaces.

-   Cutting or welding is prohibited on metal walls, ceilings, or roofs
      built of combustible sandwich-type panel construction or having
      combustible covering.

-   Confined spaces such as tanks are tested to ensure that the
      atmosphere is not over ten percent of the lower flammable limit
      before cutting or welding in or on the tank.

-   Small tanks, piping, or containers that cannot be entered are
      cleaned, purged, and tested before cutting or welding on them
      begins.

-   Fire watch has been established.

Flammable and Combustible Materials

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] shall regularly evaluate the
presence of flammable and combustible materials at [Company Name] (see
Attachment I.4).

Certain types of substances can ignite at relatively low temperatures or
pose a risk of catastrophic explosion if ignited. Such substances
obviously require special care and handling.

I.  Class A Combustibles

  These include common combustible materials (wood, paper, cloth,
  rubber, and plastics) that can act as fuel and are found in
  non-specialized areas such as offices. To handle Class A combustibles
  safely, follow these instructions:

-   Dispose of waste daily.

-   Keep trash in metal-lined receptacles with tight-fitting covers
      (metal wastebaskets that are emptied every day do not need to be
      covered).

-   Keep work areas clean and free of fuel paths that could allow a fire
      to spread.

-   Keep combustibles away from accidental ignition sources, such as hot
      plates, soldering irons, or other heat-producing or
      spark-producing devices.

-   Store paper stock in metal cabinets.

-   Store rags in metal bins with self-closing lids.

-   Do not order excessive amounts of combustibles.

-   Make frequent inspections to anticipate fires before they start.

  Water, multi-purpose dry chemical (ABC), and halon 1211 are approved
  fire extinguishing agents for Class A combustibles.

II. Class B Combustibles

  These include flammable and combustible liquids (oils, greases, tars,
  oil-based paints, and lacquers), flammable gases, and flammable
  aerosols. To handle Class B combustibles safely, follow these
  instructions:

-   Use only approved pumps, taking suction from the top, to dispense
      liquids from tanks, drums, barrels, or similar containers (or use
      approved self-closing valves or faucets).

-   Do not dispense Class B flammable liquids into containers unless the
      nozzle and container are electrically interconnected by contact or
      by a bonding wire. Either the tank or container must be grounded.

-   Store, handle, and use Class B combustibles only in approved
      locations where vapors are prevented from reaching ignition
      sources such as heating or electric equipment, open flames, or
      mechanical or electric sparks.

-   Do not use a flammable liquid as a cleaning agent inside a building
      (the only exception is in a closed machine approved for cleaning
      with flammable liquids).

-   Do not use, handle, or store Class B combustibles near exits,
      stairs, or any other areas normally used as exits.

-   Do not weld, cut, grind, or use unsafe electrical appliances or
      equipment near Class B combustibles.

-   Do not generate heat, allow an open flame, or smoke near Class B
      combustibles.

-   Know the location of and how to use the nearest portable fire
      extinguisher rated for Class B fire.

  Water should not be used to extinguish Class B fires caused by
  flammable liquids. Water can cause the burning liquid to spread,
  making the fire worse. To extinguish a fire caused by flammable
  liquids, exclude the air around the burning liquid. The following
  fire-extinguishing agents are approved for Class B combustibles:
  carbon dioxide, multi-purpose dry chemical (ABC), halon 1301, and
  halon 1211.

  NOTE: Certain kinds of halon fire suppressant have been determined to
  be ozone-depleting substances and are no longer being manufactured.
  Existing systems using halon can be kept in place.

Smoking

Smoking is prohibited inside all buildings and inside jobsite locations.
Certain outdoor areas may also be designated as no smoking areas. The
areas in which smoking is prohibited outdoors are identified by “NO
SMOKING” signs.

TRAINING

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] shall present basic fire
prevention training to all employees upon employment, and shall maintain
documentation of the training, which includes:

-   Review of 29 CFR 1910.38, including how it can be accessed

-   This Fire Prevention Plan, including how it can be accessed

-   Good housekeeping practices

-   Proper response and notification in the event of a fire

-   Instruction on the use of portable fire extinguishers (as determined
    by company policy in the Emergency Action Plan)

-   Recognition of potential fire hazards

Supervisors shall train employees about the fire hazards associated with
the specific materials and processes to which they are exposed, and will
maintain documentation of the training. Employees will receive this
training at these times:

-   At their initial assignment

-   Annually

-   When changes in work processes necessitate additional training

PROGRAM EVALUATION

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] shall review this Fire Prevention
Plan at least annually for necessary changes.

Attachment I.1.—Fire Risk Survey

[Company Name]

{Location}

  --------------------- ---------- ------------------- --------------
  Type of Fire Hazard   Location   Emergency Actions   Required PPE
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
  --------------------- ---------- ------------------- --------------

Completed by: Date:

Attachment I.2.—General Fire Prevention Checklist

[Company Name]

Use this checklist to ensure fire prevention measures conform to the
general fire prevention requirements found in OSHA standards.

+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 14. Is the local fire department acquainted with your      | YES NO |
|     facility, its location, and specific hazards?          |        |
+============================================================+========+
| 1.  If you have a fire alarm system, is it tested at least | YES NO |
|     annually?                                              |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 2.  If you have interior stand pipes and valves, are they  | YES NO |
|     inspected regularly?                                   |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 3.  If you have outside private fire hydrants, are they on | YES NO |
|     a routine preventive maintenance schedule and flushed  |        |
|     at least once a year?                                  |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 4.  Are fire doors and shutters in good operating          | YES NO |
|     condition?                                             |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 5.  Are fire doors and shutters unobstructed and protected | YES NO |
|     against obstructions, including their counterweights?  |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 6.  Are automatic sprinkler system water control valves,   | YES NO |
|     air pressure, and water pressure checked weekly or     |        |
|     periodically?                                          |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 7.  Has responsibility for the maintenance of automatic    | YES NO |
|     sprinkler systems been assigned to an employee or      |        |
|     contractor?                                            |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 8.  Are sprinkler heads protected by metal guards?         | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 9.  Is proper clearance maintained below sprinkler heads?  | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 10. Are portable fire extinguishers provided in adequate   | YES NO |
|     number and type?*                                      |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 11. Are fire extinguishers mounted in readily accessible   | YES NO |
|     locations?*                                            |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 12. Are fire extinguishers recharged regularly with the    | YES NO |
|     recharge date noted on an inspection tag?*             |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 13. Are employees periodically instructed in the use of    | YES NO |
|     extinguishers and fire protection procedures?*         |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+

*NOTE: Use of fire extinguishers is based on company policy regarding
employee fire fighting in your Emergency Action Plan and local fire
code.

Completed by: Date:

Attachment I.3.—Exits Checklist

[Company Name]

Use this checklist to evaluate [Company Name] compliance with OSHA's
standard on emergency exit routes.

+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 15. Is each exit marked with an exit sign and illuminated  | YES NO |
|     by a reliable light source?                            |        |
+============================================================+========+
| 1.  Are the directions to exits, when not immediately      | YES NO |
|     apparent, marked with visible signs?                   |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 2.  Are doors, passageways, or stairways that are neither  | YES NO |
|     exits nor access to exits, and which could be mistaken |        |
|     for exits, marked “NOT AN EXIT” or other appropriate   |        |
|     marking?                                               |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 3.  Are exit signs provided with the word “EXIT” in        | YES NO |
|     letters at least five inches high and with lettering   |        |
|     at least one inch wide?                                |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 4.  Are exit doors side-hinged?                            | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 5.  Are all exits kept free of obstructions?               | YES NO |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 6.  Are there at least two exit routes provided from       | YES NO |
|     elevated platforms, pits, or rooms where the absence   |        |
|     of a second exit would increase the risk of injury     |        |
|     from hot, poisonous, corrosive, suffocating,           |        |
|     flammable, or explosive substances?                    |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 7.  Is the number of exits from each floor of a building   | YES NO |
|     and from the building itself appropriate for the       |        |
|     building occupancy? (NOTE: Do not count revolving,     |        |
|     sliding, or overhead doors when evaluating whether     |        |
|     there are sufficient exits.)                           |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 8.  Are exit stairways that are required to be separated   | YES NO |
|     from other parts of a building enclosed by at least    |        |
|     one-hour fire-resistant walls (or at least two-hour    |        |
|     fire-resistant walls in buildings over four stories    |        |
|     high)?                                                 |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 9.  Are the slopes of ramps used as part of emergency      | YES NO |
|     building exits limited to one foot vertical and 12     |        |
|     feet horizontal?                                       |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 10. Are glass doors or storm doors fully tempered, and do  | YES NO |
|     they meet the safety requirements for human impact?    |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 11. Can exit doors be opened from the direction of exit    | YES NO |
|     travel without the use of a key or any special         |        |
|     knowledge or effort?                                   |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 12. Are doors on cold storage rooms provided with an       | YES NO |
|     inside release mechanism that will release the latch   |        |
|     and open the door even if it's padlocked or otherwise  |        |
|     locked on the outside?                                 |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 13. Where exit doors open directly onto any street, alley, | YES NO |
|     or other area where vehicles may be operated, are      |        |
|     adequate barriers and warnings provided to prevent     |        |
|     employees from stepping into the path of traffic?      |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 14. Are doors that swing in both directions and are        | YES NO |
|     located between rooms where there is frequent traffic  |        |
|     equipped with glass viewing panels?                    |        |
+------------------------------------------------------------+--------+

Completed by: Date:

Attachment I.4.—Flammable and Combustible Materials Checklist

[Company Name]

{Location}

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- ----- -----
  Checklist                                                                                                                                                                               Needs to be Addressed   Yes   N/A
  Are combustible scrap, debris, and waste materials (oily rags, etc.) stored in covered metal receptacles and removed from the worksite promptly?                                                                       
  Is proper storage practiced to minimize the risk of fire including spontaneous combustion?                                                                                                                             
  Are approved containers and tanks used for the storage and handling of flammable and combustible liquids?                                                                                                              
  Are all connections on drums and combustible liquid piping, vapor and liquid tight?                                                                                                                                    
  Are all flammable liquids kept in closed containers when not in use (e.g., parts cleaning tanks, pans, etc.)?                                                                                                          
  Are bulk drums of flammable liquids grounded and bonded to containers during dispensing?                                                                                                                               
  Do storage rooms for flammable and combustible liquids have explosion-proof lights?                                                                                                                                    
  Do storage rooms for flammable and combustible liquids have mechanical or gravity ventilation?                                                                                                                         
  Is liquefied petroleum gas stored, handled, and used in accordance with safe practices and standards?                                                                                                                  
  Are “NO SMOKING” signs posted on liquefied petroleum gas tanks?                                                                                                                                                        
  Are liquefied petroleum storage tanks guarded to prevent damage from vehicles?                                                                                                                                         
  Are all solvent wastes, and flammable liquids kept in fire-resistant, covered containers until they are removed from the worksite?                                                                                     
  Is vacuuming used whenever possible rather than blowing or sweeping combustible dust?                                                                                                                                  
  Are firm separators placed between containers of combustibles or flammables, when stacked one upon another, to assure their support and stability?                                                                     
  Are fuel gas cylinders and oxygen cylinders separated by distance, and fire-resistant barriers, while in storage?                                                                                                      
  Are fire extinguishers selected and provided for the types of materials in areas where they are to be used?                                                                                                            
       Class A - Ordinary combustible material fires                                                                                                                                                                     
       Class B - Flammable, liquid, gas or grease fires                                                                                                                                                                  
       Class C - Energized - electrical equipment fires                                                                                                                                                                  
  Are appropriate fire extinguishers mounted within 75 feet of outside areas containing flammable liquids, and within 10 feet of any inside storage area for such materials?                                             
  Are all extinguishers serviced, maintained and tagged at intervals not to exceed 1 year?                                                                                                                               
  Are all extinguishers fully charged and in their designated places?                                                                                                                                                    
  Where sprinkler systems are permanently installed, are the nozzle heads so directed or arranged that water will not be sprayed into operating electrical switch boards and equipment?                                  
  Are "NO SMOKING" signs posted where appropriate in areas where flammable or combustible materials are used or stored?                                                                                                  
  Are safety cans used for dispensing flammable or combustible liquids at a point of use?                                                                                                                                
  Are all spills of flammable or combustible liquids cleaned up promptly?                                                                                                                                                
  Are storage tanks equipped with emergency venting that will relieve excessive internal pressure caused by fire exposure?                                                                                               
  Are "NO SMOKING" rules enforced in areas involving storage and use of hazardous materials?                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- ----- -----

Completed by: Date:

APPENDIX J:

INJURY AND ILLNESS PREVENTION PROGRAM FOR HIGH HAZARD EMPLOYERS

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1926.20b

[Company Name]

[SPFA Member ID]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE

    a.  Management Leadership

    b.  Worker Participation

    c.  Hazard Identification and Assessment

    d.  Hazard Prevention and Control

    e.  Education and Training

    f.  Program Evaluation and Improvement

2.  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

    a.  Company Policy

    b.  Responsibilities

3.  PROGRAM ELEMENTS

    a.  Communication

    b.  Hazard Assessment

    c.  Accident and Exposure Investigations

    d.  Hazard Correction

    e.  Training and Instruction

    f.  List of Training Subjects

4.  EVALUATION, DOCUMENTATION, AND RECORDKEEPING

ATTACHMENT J.1.—HAZARD ASSESSMENT CHECKLIST

ATTACHMENT J.2.—HAZARD ASSESSMENT AND CORRECTION RECORD

ATTACHMENT J.3.—ACCIDENT OR EXPOSURE INVESTIGATION REPORT

ATTACHMENT J.4.—WORKER TRAINING AND INSTRUCTION RECORD

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

It has been demonstrated that employers that establish and maintain
effective injury prevention programs save lives and money. These
programs are mandatory in some states and optional in others. They must
be in writing and include the following six elements:

Management Leadership

-   Establish clear safety and health goals for the program and define
      the actions needed to achieve those goals.

-   Designate one or more individuals with overall responsibility for
      implementing and maintaining the program.

-   Provide sufficient resources to ensure effective program
      implementation.

Worker Participation

-   Consult with workers in developing and implementing the program, and
      involve them in updating and evaluating the program.

-   Include workers in workplace inspections and incident
      investigations.

-   Encourage workers to report concerns, such as hazards, injuries,
      illnesses, and near misses.

-   Protect the rights of workers who participate in the program.

Hazard Identification and Assessment

-   Identify, assess, and document workplace hazards by soliciting input
      from workers, inspecting the workplace, and reviewing available
      information on hazards.

-   Investigate injuries and illnesses to identify hazards that may have
      caused them.

-   Inform workers of the hazards in the workplace.

Hazard Prevention and Control

-   Establish and implement a plan to prioritize and control hazards
      identified in the workplace.

-   Provide interim controls to protect workers from any hazards that
      cannot be controlled immediately.

-   Verify that all control measures are implemented and are effective.

-   Discuss the hazard control plan with affected workers.

Education and Training

-   Provide education and training to workers in a language and
      vocabulary they can understand to ensure that they know:

    -   Procedures for reporting injuries, illnesses, and safety and
          health concerns

    -   How to recognize hazards

    -   Ways to eliminate, control, and reduce hazards

    -   Elements of the program

    -   How to participate in the program

-   Conduct refresher education and training programs periodically.

Program Evaluation and Improvement

-   Conduct a periodic review of the program to determine if it has been
      implemented as designed and is making progress towards achieving
      its goals.

-   Modify the program, as necessary, to correct deficiencies.

-   Continuously look for ways to improve the program.

PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

Company Policy

It is the policy of [Company Name] that every employee is entitled to a
safe and healthful place in which to work. To this end, every reasonable
effort will be made in the interest of Accident Prevention, Fire
Protection, and Health Preservation.

The management concept of [Company Name] is not production and safety;
it is production with safety. When production with safety is achieved,
production with efficiency is attained as well.

We at [Company Name] have a basic responsibility to make the safety of
human beings a part of our daily, hourly concern. We count on you to do
your part in making our program an effective one.

The successful operation of [Company Name] will depend not only on sales
and service, but also on how safely each job is performed. There is no
job so important—nor any service so urgent—that we cannot take time to
work safely. I consider the safety of our personnel to be of prime
importance, and I expect your full cooperation in making our program
effective.

  Signed

Responsibilities

The Injury and Illness Prevention Program (IIP Program) administrator,
[Health and Safety Officer Title] has the authority and responsibility
for implementing the provisions of this program for [Company Name].

All managers and supervisors are responsible for implementing and
maintaining the IIP Program in their work areas and for answering worker
questions about the IIP Program. A copy of this IIP Program is available
from each manager and supervisor.

Management is responsible for ensuring that all safety and health
policies and procedures are clearly communicated and understood by all
employees. Managers and supervisors are expected to enforce the rules
fairly and uniformly.

All employees are responsible for using safe work practices, for
following all directives, policies and procedures, and for assisting in
maintaining a safe work environment.

Our system of ensuring that all workers comply with the rules and
maintain a safe work environment includes:

-   Informing workers of the provisions of our IIP Program

-   Evaluating the safety performance of all workers

-   Recognizing employees who perform safe and healthful work practices

-   Providing training to workers whose safety performance is deficient

-   Disciplining workers for failure to comply with safe and healthful
      work practices

-   The following practices:

PROGRAM ELEMENTS

Communication

We recognize that open, two-way communication between management and
staff on health and safety issues is essential to an injury-free,
productive workplace. The following system of communication is designed
to facilitate a continuous flow of safety and health information between
management and staff in a form that is readily understandable and that
consists of one or more of the following checked items:

-   New worker orientation including a discussion of safety and health
      policies and procedures.

-   Review of our IIP Program.

-   Workplace safety and health training programs.

-   Regularly scheduled safety meetings.

-   Effective communication of safety and health concerns between
      workers and supervisors, including translation where appropriate.

-   Posted or distributed safety information.

-   A system for workers to anonymously inform management about
      workplace hazards.

-   Our establishment has less than ten employees. The company
      communicates with and instructs these employees orally about
      general safe work practices with respect to hazards unique to each
      employee's job assignment.

-   A labor and management safety and health committee that meets
      regularly, prepares written records of the safety and health
      committees meetings, reviews results of the periodic scheduled
      inspections, reviews investigations of accidents and exposures,
      makes suggestions to management for the prevention of future
      incidents, reviews investigations of alleged hazardous conditions,
      and submits recommendations to assist in the evaluation of
      employee safety suggestion.

-   Other:

Table 1: Hazard Assessment

Periodic inspections to identify and evaluate workplace hazards shall be
performed by the following competent observer(s) in the following areas
of our workplace:

  Competent Observer Area

  Periodic inspections are performed according to the following
  schedule: {Frequency (daily, weekly, monthly, etc.)}

-   When we initially established our IIP Program

-   When new substances, processes, procedures or equipment which
      present potential new hazards are introduced into our workplace

-   When new, previously unidentified hazards are recognized

-   When occupational injuries and illnesses occur

-   When we hire or reassign permanent or intermittent workers to
      processes, operations, or tasks for which a hazard evaluation has
      not been previously conducted

-   Whenever workplace conditions warrant an inspection

  Periodic inspections consist of identification and evaluation of
  workplace hazards utilizing applicable sections of the attached Hazard
  Assessment Checklist and any other effective methods to identify and
  evaluate workplace hazards.

Accident or Exposure Investigations

Procedures for investigating workplace accidents and hazardous substance
exposures include:

-   Visiting the accident scene as soon as possible

-   Interviewing injured workers and witnesses

-   Examining the workplace for factors associated with the accident or
      exposure

-   Determining the cause of the accident or exposure

-   Taking corrective action to prevent the accident or exposure from
      reoccurring

-   Recording the findings and corrective actions taken

Hazard Correction

Unsafe or unhealthy work conditions, practices, or procedures shall be
corrected in a timely manner based on the severity of the hazards.
Hazards shall be corrected according to the following procedures:

-   When hazards are observed or discovered, they are corrected.

-   When an imminent hazard exists that cannot be immediately abated
      without endangering employee(s) or property, we will remove all
      exposed workers from the area except those necessary to correct
      the existing condition. Workers necessary to correct the hazardous
      condition shall be provided with the necessary protection.

-   All such actions taken and dates they are completed shall be
      documented on the appropriate forms.

Training and Instruction

All workers, including managers and supervisors, shall have training and
instruction on general and job-specific safety and health practices.
Training and instruction shall be provided as follows:

-   When the IIP Program is first established

-   To all new workers, except for construction workers who are provided
      training through a Cal/OSHA approved construction industry
      occupational safety and health training program

-   To all workers given new job assignments for which training has not
      previously provided

-   Whenever new substances, processes, procedures or equipment are
      introduced to the workplace and represent a new hazard

-   Whenever the employer is made aware of a new or previously
      unrecognized hazard

-   To supervisors to familiarize them with the safety and health
      hazards to which workers under their immediate direction and
      control may be exposed

-   To all workers with respect to hazards specific to each employee's
      job assignment

  Workplace safety and health practices for all industries include, but
  are not limited to, the following:

-   Explanation of the employer's IIP Program, emergency action plan,
      and fire prevention plan; measures for reporting any unsafe
      conditions, work practices, and injuries; and when additional
      instruction is needed

-   Use of appropriate clothing, including gloves, footwear, and
      personal protective equipment

-   Information about chemical hazards to which employees could be
      exposed and other hazard communication program information

-   Availability of toilet, hand-washing, and drinking water facilities

-   Provisions for medical services and first aid including emergency
      procedures

  In addition, we provide specific instructions to all workers regarding
  hazards unique to their job assignment to the extent that such
  information was not already covered in other training.

List of Training Subjects

[Company Name] trains our workers about the following checked training
subjects:

-   The employer's Code of Safe Practices

-   Confined spaces

-   Safe practices for operating any agricultural equipment

-   Good housekeeping, fire prevention, and safe practices for operating
      any construction equipment

-   Safe procedures for cleaning, repairing, servicing, and adjusting
      equipment and machinery

-   Safe access to working areas

-   Protection from falls

-   Electrical hazards, including working around high voltage lines

-   Crane operations

-   Trenching and excavation work

-   Proper use of powered tools

-   Guarding of belts and pulleys, gears and sprockets, and conveyor nip
      points

-   Machine, machine parts, and prime movers guarding

-   Lock-out/tag-out procedures

-   Materials handling

-   Chainsaw and other power tool operation

-   Tree falling and bucking procedures and precautions, including
      procedures for recognizing and working with hazard trees, snags,
      lodged trees, and unsafe weather conditions

-   Yarding operations, including skidding, running lines, unstable
      logs, rigging, and communication

-   Landing and loading areas, including release of rigging, landing
      layout, moving vehicles and equipment, and log truck locating,
      loading, and wrapping

-   Fall protection from elevated locations

-   Use of elevated platforms, including condors and scissor lifts

-   Safe use of explosives

-   Driver safety

-   Slips, falls, and back injuries

-   Ergonomic hazards, including proper lifting techniques and working
      on ladders or in a stooped posture for prolonged periods at one
      time

-   Personal protective equipment

-   Respiratory equipment

-   Hazardous chemical exposures

-   Hazard communication

-   Physical hazards, such as heat or cold stress, noise, and ionizing
      and non-ionizing radiation

-   Laboratory safety

-   Blood-borne pathogens and other biological hazards

-   Other job-specific hazards, such as:

EVALUATION, DOCUMENTATION AND RECORD KEEPING

We have checked one of the following categories as our recordkeeping
policy:

-   Category 1: Our establishment is on a designated high hazard
    industry list. We have taken the following steps to implement and
    maintain our IIP Program:

  Records of hazard assessment inspections, including the person(s) or
  persons conducting the inspection, the unsafe conditions and work
  practices that have been identified and the action taken to correct
  the identified unsafe conditions and work practices, are recorded on a
  hazard assessment and correction form.

  Documentation of safety and health training for each worker, including
  the worker's name or other identifier, training dates, type(s) of
  training, and training providers are recorded on a worker training and
  instruction form. We also include the records relating to worker
  training provided by a construction industry occupational safety and
  health program approved by OSHA.

  Inspection records and training documentation will be maintained
  according to the following checked schedule:

-   For one year, except for training records of employees who have
    worked for less than one year that are provided to the worker upon
    termination of employment; or

-   Since we have less than ten workers, including managers and
    supervisors, we maintain inspection records only until the hazard is
    corrected. We also only maintain a log of instructions to workers
    with respect to worker job assignments when they are first hired or
    assigned new duties.

-   Category 2: We are a local governmental entity (any county, city, or
    district, and any public or quasi-public corporation or public
    agency therein) and we are not required to keep written records of
    the steps taken to implement and maintain our IIP Program.

ATTACHMENT J.1.—HAZARD ASSESSMENT CHECKLIST

GENERAL WORK ENVIRONMENT

-   Are all worksites clean and orderly?

-   Are work surfaces kept dry or appropriate means taken to assure the
    surfaces are slip-resistant?

-   Are all spilled materials or liquids cleaned up immediately?

-   Is combustible scrap, debris, and waste stored safely and removed
    from the worksite promptly?

-   Is accumulated combustible dust routinely removed from elevated
    surfaces, including the overhead structure of buildings?

-   Is combustible dust cleaned up with a vacuum system to prevent the
    dust going into suspension?

-   Is metallic or conductive dust prevented from entering or
    accumulation on or around electrical enclosures or equipment?

-   Are covered metal waste cans used for oily and paint-soaked waste?

-   Are all oil and gas fired devices equipped with flame failure
    controls that will prevent flow of fuel if pilots or main burners
    are not working?

-   Are paint spray booths, dip tanks, and the like cleaned regularly?

-   Are the minimum number of toilets and washing facilities provided?

-   Are all toilets and washing facilities clean and sanitary?

-   Are all work areas adequately illuminated?

-   Are pits and floor openings covered or otherwise guarded?

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT and CLOTHING

-   Are protective goggles or face shields provided and worn where there
    is any danger of flying particles or corrosive materials?

-   Are approved safety glasses required to be worn at all times in
    areas where there is a risk of eye injuries such as punctures,
    abrasions, contusions, or burns?

-   Are employees who need corrective lenses (glasses or contacts
    lenses) in working environments with harmful exposures required to
    wear only approved safety glasses, protective goggles, or use other
    medically approved precautionary procedures?

-   Are protective gloves, aprons, shields, or other means provided
    against cuts, corrosive liquids, and chemicals?

-   Are hard hats provided and worn where danger of falling objects
    exists?

-   Are hard hats inspected periodically for damage to the shell and
    suspension system?

-   Is appropriate foot protection required where there is the risk of
    foot injuries from hot, corrosive, poisonous substances, falling
    objects, crushing, or penetrating actions?

-   Are approved respirators provided for regular or emergency use where
    needed?

-   Is all protective equipment maintained in a sanitary condition and
    ready for use?

-   Do you have eye wash facilities and a quick drench shower within the
    work area where employees are exposed to injurious corrosive
    materials?

-   Where special equipment is needed for electrical workers, is it
    available?

-   When lunches are eaten on the premises, are they eaten in areas
    where there is no exposure to toxic materials or other health
    hazards?

-   Is protection against the effects of occupational noise exposure
    provided when sound levels exceed those of the OSHA noise standard?

WALKWAYS

-   Are aisles and passageways kept clear?

-   Are aisles and walkways marked as appropriate?

-   Are wet surfaces covered with non-slip materials?

-   Are holes in the floor, sidewalk, or other walking surface repaired
    properly, covered, or otherwise made safe?

-   Is there safe clearance for walking in aisles where motorized or
    mechanical handling equipment is operating?

-   Are spilled materials cleaned up immediately?

-   Are materials or equipment stored in such a way that sharp
    projectiles will not interfere with the walkway?

-   Are changes of direction or elevations readily identifiable?

-   Are aisles or walkways that pass near moving or operating machinery,
    welding operations, or similar operations arranged so employees will
    not be subjected to potential hazards?

-   Is adequate headroom provided for the entire length of any aisle or
    walkway?

-   Are standard guardrails provided wherever aisle or walkway surfaces
    are elevated more than 30 inches above any adjacent floor or the
    ground?

-   Are bridges provided over conveyors and similar hazards?

FLOOR and WALL OPENINGS

-   Are floor openings guarded by a cover, guardrail, or equivalent on
    all sides (except at entrance to stairways or ladders)?

-   Are toeboards installed around the edges of a permanent floor
    opening (where persons may pass below the opening)?

-   Are skylight screens of such construction and mounting that they
    will withstand a load of at least 200 pounds?

-   Is the glass in windows, doors, and glass walls that are subject to
    human impact of sufficient thickness and type for the condition of
    use?

-   Are grates or similar type covers over floor openings, such as floor
    drains, of such design that foot traffic or rolling equipment will
    not be affected by the grate spacing?

-   Are unused portions of service pits and pits not actually in use
    either covered or protected by guardrails or equivalent?

-   Are manhole covers, trench covers, and similar covers, plus their
    supports, designed to carry a truck rear axle load of at least
    20,000 pounds when located in roadways and subject to vehicle
    traffic?

-   Are floor or wall openings in fire resistive construction provided
    with doors or covers compatible with the fire rating of the
    structure and provided with self-closing features when appropriate?

STAIRS and STAIRWAYS

-   Are standard stair rails or handrails on all stairways having four
    or more risers?

-   Are all stairways at least 22 inches wide?

-   Do stairs have at least a 6'6" overhead clearance?

-   Do stairs angle no more than 50 and no less than 30 degrees?

-   Are stairs of hollow-pan type treads and landings filled to noising
    level with solid material?

-   Are step risers on stairs uniform from top to bottom, with no riser
    spacing greater than 7-1/2 inches?

-   Are steps on stairs and stairways designed or provided with a
    surface that renders them slip resistant?

-   Are stairway handrails located between 30 and 34 inches above the
    leading edge of stair treads?

-   Do stairway handrails have a least 1.5 inches of clearance between
    the handrails and the wall or surface they are mounted on?

-   Are stairway handrails capable of withstanding a load of 200 pounds,
    applied in any direction?

-   Where stairs or stairways exit directly into any area where vehicles
    may be operated, are adequate barriers and warnings provided to
    prevent employees stepping into the path of traffic?

-   Do stairway landings have a dimension measured in the direction of
    travel, at least equal to width of the stairway?

-   Is the vertical distance between stairway landings limited to 12
    feet or less?

ELEVATED SURFACES

-   Are signs posted, when appropriate, showing the elevated surface
    load capacity?

-   Are surfaces elevated more than 30 inches above the floor or ground
    provided with standard guardrails?

-   Are all elevated surfaces (beneath which people or machinery could
    be exposed to falling objects) provided with standard 4-inch
    toeboards?

-   Is a permanent means of access and egress provided to elevated
    storage and work surfaces?

-   Is required headroom provided where necessary?

-   Is material on elevated surfaces piled, stacked, or racked in a
    manner to prevent it from tipping, falling, collapsing, rolling, or
    spreading?

-   Are dock boards or bridge plates used when transferring materials
    between docks and trucks or rail cars?

EXITING OR EGRESS

-   Are all exits marked with an exit sign and illuminated by a reliable
    light source?

-   Are the directions to exits, when not immediately apparent, marked
    with visible signs?

-   Are doors, passageways, or stairways that are neither exits nor
    access to exits and which could be mistaken for exits, appropriately
    marked "NOT AN EXIT,” "TO BASEMENT,” "STOREROOM,” and the like?

-   Are exit signs provided with the word "EXIT" in lettering at least
    five inches high and the stroke of the lettering at least 1/2 inch
    wide?

-   Are exit doors side-hinged?

-   Are all exits kept free of obstructions?

-   Are at least two means of egress provided from elevated platforms,
    pits, or rooms where the absence of a second exit would increase the
    risk of injury from hot, poisonous, corrosive, suffocating,
    flammable, or explosive substances?

-   Are there sufficient exits to permit prompt escape in case of
    emergency?

-   Are special precautions taken to protect employees during
    construction and repair operations?

-   Is the number of exits from each floor of a building, and the number
    of exits from the building itself, appropriate for the building
    occupancy load?

-   Are exit stairways, which are required to be separated from other
    parts of a building, enclosed by at least two hour fire- resistive
    construction in buildings more than four stories in height, and not
    less than one-hour fire resistive construction elsewhere?

-   When ramps are used as part of required exiting from a building, is
    the ramp slope limited to one foot vertical and 12 feet horizontal?

-   Where exiting will be through frameless glass doors, glass exit
    doors, storm doors, and such, are the doors fully tempered and meet
    the safety requirements for human impact?

EXIT DOORS

-   Are doors that are required to serve as exits designed and
    constructed so that the way of exit travel is obvious and direct?

-   Are windows that could be mistaken for exit doors made inaccessible
    by means of barriers or railings?

-   Are exit doors openable from the direction of exit travel without
    the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort when the
    building is occupied?

-   Is a revolving, sliding, or overhead door prohibited from serving as
    a required exit door?

-   Where panic hardware is installed on a required exit door, will it
    allow the door to open by applying a force of 15 pounds or less in
    the direction of the exit traffic?

-   Are doors on cold storage rooms provided with an inside release
    mechanism that will release the latch and open the door even if it's
    padlocked or otherwise locked on the outside?

-   Where exit doors open directly onto any street, alley or other area
    where vehicles may be operated, are adequate barriers and warnings
    provided to prevent employees stepping into the path of traffic?

-   For doors that swing in both directions and are located between
    rooms where there is frequent traffic, are there viewing panels in
    each door?

PORTABLE LADDERS

-   Are all ladders maintained in good condition, joints between steps
    and side rails tight, all hardware and fittings securely attached,
    and moveable parts operating freely without binding or undue play?

-   Are non-slip safety feet provided on each ladder?

-   Are non-slip safety feet provided on each metal or rung ladder?

-   Are ladder rungs and steps free of grease and oil?

-   Is it prohibited to place a ladder in front of doors opening toward
    the ladder except when the door is blocked open, locked or guarded?

-   Is it prohibited to place ladders on boxes, barrels, or other
    unstable bases to obtain additional height?

-   Are employees instructed to face the ladder when ascending or
    descending?

-   Are employees prohibited from using ladders that are broken; missing
    steps, rungs, or cleats; or containing broken side rails or other
    faulty equipment?

-   Are employees instructed not to use the top two steps of ordinary
    stepladders as a step?

-   When portable rung ladders are used to gain access to elevated
    platforms, roofs, and the like, does the ladder always extend at
    least three feet above the elevated surface?

-   Is it required that when portable rung or cleat type ladders are
    used, the base is so placed that slipping will not occur, or it is
    lashed or otherwise held in place?

-   Are portable metal ladders legibly marked with signs reading
    "CAUTION," "Do Not Use Around Electrical Equipment," or equivalent
    wording?

-   Are employees prohibited from using ladders as guys, braces, skids,
    gin poles, or for other than their intended purposes?

-   Are employees instructed to only adjust extension ladders while
    standing at a base (not while standing on the ladder or from a
    position above the ladder)?

-   Are metal ladders inspected for damage?

-   Are the rungs of ladders uniformly spaced at 12 inches apart,
    center-to-center?

HAND TOOLS and EQUIPMENT

-   Are all tools and equipment (both company and employee- owned) used
    by employees at their workplace in good condition?

-   Are hand tools develop mushroomed heads during use, such as chisels
    and punches, reconditioned or replaced as necessary?

-   Are broken or fractured handles on hammers, axes, and similar
    equipment replaced promptly?

-   Are worn or bent wrenches replaced regularly?

-   Are appropriate handles used on files and similar tools?

-   Are employees made aware of the hazards caused by faulty or
    improperly used hand tools?

-   Are appropriate safety glasses, face shields, and similar equipment
    used while using hand tools or equipment that might produce flying
    materials or be subject to breakage?

-   Are jacks checked periodically to assure they are in good operating
    condition?

-   Are tool handles wedged tightly in the head of all tools?

-   Are tool cutting edges kept sharp so the tool will move smoothly
    without binding or skipping?

-   Are tools stored in a dry, secure location where they will not be
    tampered with?

-   Are eye and face protection used when driving hardened or tempered
    spuds or nails?

PORTABLE (POWER OPERATED) TOOLS and EQUIPMENT

-   Are grinders, saws, and similar equipment provided with appropriate
    safety guards?

-   Are power tools used with the correct shield, guard or attachment
    recommended by the manufacturer?

-   Are portable circular saws equipped with guards above and below the
    base shoe?

-   Are circular saw guards checked to assure they are not wedged up,
    thus leaving the lower portion of the blade unguarded?

-   Are rotating or moving parts of equipment guarded to prevent
    physical contact?

-   Are all cord-connected, electrically operated tools and equipment
    effectively grounded or of the approved double insulated type?

-   Are effective guards in place over belts, pulleys, chains, and
    sprockets, on equipment such as concrete mixers, air compressors,
    and the like?

-   Are portable fans provided with full guards or screens having
    openings 1/2 inch or less?

-   Is hoisting equipment available and used for lifting heavy objects,
    and are hoist ratings and characteristics appropriate for the task?

-   Are ground-fault circuit interrupters provided on all temporary
    electrical 15 and 20 ampere circuits, used during periods of
    construction?

-   Are pneumatic and hydraulic hoses on power-operated tools checked
    regularly for deterioration or damage?

ABRASIVE WHEEL EQUIPMENT GRINDERS

-   Is the work rest used and kept adjusted to within 1/8 inch of the
    wheel?

-   Is the adjustable tongue on the top side of the grinder used and
    kept adjusted to within 1/4 inch of the wheel?

-   Do side guards cover the spindle, nut, and flange and 75 percent of
    the wheel diameter?

-   Are bench and pedestal grinders permanently mounted?

-   Are goggles or face shields always worn when grinding?

-   Is the maximum RPM rating of each abrasive wheel compatible with the
    RPM rating of the grinder motor?

-   Are fixed or permanently mounted grinders connected to their
    electrical supply system with metallic conduit or other permanent
    wiring method?

-   Does each grinder have an individual on and off control switch?

-   Is each electrically operated grinder effectively grounded?

-   Before new abrasive wheels are mounted, are they visually inspected
    and ring tested?

-   Are dust collectors and powered exhausts provided on grinders used
    in operations that produce large amounts of dust?

-   Are splashguards mounted on grinders that use coolant, to prevent
    the coolant reaching employees?

-   Is cleanliness maintained around grinder?

POWDER-ACTUATED TOOLS

-   Are employees who operate powder-actuated tools trained in their use
    and carry a valid operator's card?

-   Do the powder-actuated tools being used have written approval of the
    Division of Occupational Safety and Health?

-   Is each powder-actuated tool stored in its own locked container when
    not being used?

-   Is a sign at least 7" by 10" with bold type reading "POWDER-
    ACTUATED TOOL IN USE" conspicuously posted when the tool is being
    used?

-   Are powder-actuated tools left unloaded until they are actually
    ready to be used?

-   Are powder-actuated tools inspected for obstructions or defects each
    day before use?

-   Do powder-actuated tools operators have and use appropriate personal
    protective equipment such as hard hats, safety goggles, safety shoes
    and ear protectors?

MACHINE GUARDING

-   Is there a training program to instruct employees on safe methods of
    machine operation?

-   Is there adequate supervision to ensure that employees are following
    safe machine operating procedures?

-   Is there a regular program of safety inspection of machinery and
    equipment?

-   Is all machinery and equipment kept clean and properly maintained?

-   Is sufficient clearance provided around and between machines to
    allow for safe operations, set up and servicing, material handling
    and waste removal?

-   Is equipment and machinery securely placed and anchored, when
    necessary to prevent tipping or other movement that could result in
    personal injury?

-   Is there a power shut-off switch within reach of the operator's
    position at each machine?

-   Can electric power to each machine be locked out for maintenance,
    repair, or security?

-   Are the noncurrent-carrying metal parts of electrically operated
    machines bonded and grounded?

-   Are foot-operated switches guarded or arranged to prevent accidental
    actuation by personnel or falling objects?

-   Are manually operated valves and switches controlling the operation
    of equipment and machines clearly identified and readily accessible?

-   Are all emergency stop buttons colored red?

-   Are all pulleys and belts that are within seven feet of the floor or
    working level properly guarded?

-   Are all moving chains and gears properly guarded?

-   Are splashguards mounted on machines that use coolant, to prevent
    the coolant from reaching employees?

-   Are methods provided to protect the operator and other employees in
    the machine area from hazards created at the point of operation,
    ingoing nip points, rotating parts, flying chips, and sparks?

-   Are machinery guards secure and so arranged that they do not offer a
    hazard in their use?

-   If special hand tools are used for placing and removing material, do
    they protect the operator's hands?

-   Are revolving drums, barrels, and containers required to be guarded
    by an enclosure that is interlocked with the drive mechanism, so
    that revolution cannot occur unless the guard enclosure is in place,
    so guarded?

-   Do arbors and mandrels have firm and secure bearings and are they
    free from play?

-   Are provisions made to prevent machines from automatically starting
    when power is restored after a power failure or shutdown?

-   Are machines constructed so as to be free from excessive vibration
    when the largest size tool is mounted and run at full speed?

-   If machinery is cleaned with compressed air, is air pressure
    controlled and personal protective equipment or other safeguards
    used to protect operators and other workers from eye and body
    injury?

-   Are fan blades protected with a guard having openings no larger than
    1/2 inch, when operating within seven feet of the floor?

-   Are saws used for ripping, equipped with anti-kickback devices and
    spreaders?

-   Are radial arm saws so arranged that the cutting head will gently
    return to the back of the table when released?

LOCK-OUT/BLOCK-OUT PROCEDURES

-   Is all machinery or equipment capable of movement required to be
    de-energized or disengaged and blocked or locked out during
    cleaning, servicing, adjusting, or setting up operations, whenever
    required?

-   Is the locking-out of control circuits in lieu of locking-out main
    power disconnects prohibited?

-   Are all equipment control valve handles provided with a means for
    locking-out?

-   Does the lock-out procedure require that stored energy (i.e.,
    mechanical, hydraulic, air,) be released or blocked before equipment
    is locked-out for repairs?

-   Are appropriate employees provided with individually keyed personal
    safety locks?

-   Are employees required to keep personal control of their key(s)
    while they have safety locks in use?

-   Is it required that employees check the safety of the lock out by
    attempting a start up after making sure no one is exposed?

Where the power disconnecting means for equipment does not also
disconnect the electrical control circuit:

-   Are the appropriate electrical enclosures identified?

-   Are means provided to assure the control circuit can also be
      disconnected and locked out?

WELDING, CUTTING and BRAZING

-   Are only authorized and trained personnel permitted to use welding,
    cutting or brazing equipment?

-   Do all operators have a copy of the appropriate operating
    instructions, and are they directed to follow them?

-   Are compressed gas cylinders regularly examined for obvious signs of
    defects, deep rusting, or leakage?

-   Is care used in handling and storage of cylinders, safety valves,
    relief valves, and the like, to prevent damage?

-   Are precautions taken to prevent the mixture of air or oxygen with
    flammable gases, except at a burner or in a standard torch?

-   Are only approved apparatus (torches, regulators, pressure- reducing
    valves, acetylene generators, manifolds) used?

-   Are cylinders kept away from sources of heat?

-   Is it prohibited to use cylinders as rollers or supports?

-   Are empty cylinders appropriately marked their valves closed and
    valve-protection caps on?

-   Are signs reading: DANGER NO-SMOKING, MATCHES, OR OPEN LIGHTS, or
    the equivalent posted?

-   Are cylinders, cylinder valves, couplings, regulators, hoses, and
    apparatus kept free of oily or greasy substances?

-   Is care taken not to drop or strike cylinders?

-   Unless secured on special trucks, are regulators removed and
    valve-protection caps put in place before moving cylinders?

-   Do cylinders without fixed hand wheels have keys, handles, or
    non-adjustable wrenches on stem valves when in service?

-   Are liquefied gases stored and shipped valve-end up with valve
    covers in place?

-   Are employees instructed to never crack a fuel-gas cylinder valve
    near sources of ignition?

-   Before a regulator is removed, is the valve closed and gas released
    from the regulator?

-   Is red used to identify the acetylene (and other fuel-gas) hose,
    green for oxygen hose, and black for inert gas and air hose?

-   Are pressure-reducing regulators used only for the gas and pressures
    for which they are intended?

-   Is open circuit (No Load) voltage of arc welding and cutting
    machines as low as possible and not in excess of the recommended
    limits?

-   Under wet conditions, are automatic controls for reducing no-load
    voltage used?

-   Is grounding of the machine frame and safety ground connections of
    portable machines checked periodically?

-   Are electrodes removed from the holders when not in use?

-   Is it required that electric power to the welder be shut off when no
    one is in attendance?

-   Is suitable fire extinguishing equipment available for immediate
    use?

-   Is the welder forbidden to coil or loop welding electrode cable
    around his body?

-   Are wet machines thoroughly dried and tested before being used?

-   Are work and electrode lead cables frequently inspected for wear and
    damage, and replaced when needed?

-   Do means for connecting cables' lengths have adequate insulation?

-   When the object to be welded cannot be moved and fire hazards cannot
    be removed, are shields used to confine heat, sparks, and slag?

-   Are firewatchers assigned when welding or cutting is performed, in
    locations where a serious fire might develop?

-   Are combustible floors kept wet, covered by damp sand, or protected
    by fire-resistant shields?

-   When floors are wet down, are personnel protected from possible
    electrical shock?

-   When welding is done on metal walls, are precautions taken to
    protect combustibles on the other side?

-   Before hot work is begun, are used drums, barrels, tanks, and other
    containers so thoroughly cleaned that no substances remain that
    could explode, ignite, or produce toxic vapors?

-   Is it required that eye protection helmets, hand shields and goggles
    meet appropriate standards?

-   Are employees exposed to the hazards created by welding, cutting, or
    bracing operations protected with personal protective equipment and
    clothing?

-   Is a check made for adequate ventilation in and where welding or
    cutting is preformed?

-   When working in confined places are environmental monitoring tests
    taken and means provided for quick removal of welders in case of an
    emergency?

COMPRESSORS and COMPRESSED AIR

-   Are compressors equipped with pressure relief valves, and pressure
    gauges?

-   Are compressor air intakes installed and equipped to ensure that
    only clean uncontaminated air enters the compressor?

-   Are air filters installed on the compressor intake?

-   Are compressors operated and lubricated in accordance with the
    manufacturer's recommendations?

-   Are safety devices on compressed air systems checked frequently?

-   Before any repair work is done on the pressure system of a
    compressor, is the pressure bled off and the system locked-out?

-   Are signs posted to warn of the automatic starting feature of the
    compressors?

-   Is the belt drive system totally enclosed to provide protection for
    the front, back, top, and sides?

-   Is it strictly prohibited to direct compressed air towards a person?

-   Are employees prohibited from using highly compressed air for
    cleaning purposes?

-   If compressed air is used for cleaning off clothing, is the pressure
    reduced to less than 10 psi?

-   When using compressed air for cleaning, do employees use personal
    protective equipment?

-   Are safety chains or other suitable locking devices used at
    couplings of high pressure hose lines where a connection failure
    would create a hazard?

-   Before compressed air is used to empty containers of liquid, is the
    safe working pressure of the container checked?

-   When compressed air is used with abrasive blast cleaning equipment,
    is the operating valve a type that must be held open manually?

-   When compressed air is used to inflate auto tires, is a clip-on
    chuck and an inline regulator preset to 40 psi required?

-   Is it prohibited to use compressed air to clean up or move
    combustible dust if such action could cause the dust to be suspended
    in the air and cause a fire or explosion hazard?

COMPRESSED AIR RECEIVERS

-   Is every receiver equipped with a pressure gauge and with one or
    more automatic, spring-loaded safety valves?

-   Is the total relieving capacity of the safety valve capable of
    preventing pressure in the receiver from exceeding the maximum
    allowable working pressure of the receiver by more than 10 percent?

-   Is every air receiver provided with a drainpipe and valve at the
    lowest point for the removal of accumulated oil and water?

-   Are compressed air receivers periodically drained of moisture and
    oil?

-   Are all safety valves tested frequently and at regular intervals to
    determine whether they are in good operating condition?

-   Is there a current operating permit issued by the Division of
    Occupational Safety and Health?

-   Is the inlet of air receivers and piping systems kept free of
    accumulated oil and carbonaceous materials?

COMPRESSED GAS and CYLINDERS

-   Are cylinders with a water weight capacity over 30 pounds equipped
    with means for connecting a valve protector device, or with a collar
    or recess to protect the valve?

-   Are cylinders legibly marked to clearly identify the gas contained?

-   Are compressed gas cylinders stored in areas which are protected
    from external heat sources such as flame impingement, intense
    radiant heat, electric arcs, or high temperature lines?

-   Are cylinders located or stored in areas where they will not be
    damaged by passing or falling objects or subject to tampering by
    unauthorized persons?

-   Are cylinders stored or transported in a manner to prevent them
    creating a hazard by tipping, falling or rolling?

-   Are cylinders containing liquefied fuel gas, stored or transported
    in a position so that the safety relief device is always in direct
    contact with the vapor space in the cylinder?

-   Are valve protectors always placed on cylinders when the cylinders
    are not in use or connected for use?

-   Are all valves closed off before a cylinder is moved, when the
    cylinder is empty, and at the completion of each job?

-   Are low pressure fuel-gas cylinders checked periodically for
    corrosion, general distortion, cracks, or any other defect that
    might indicate a weakness or render it unfit for service?

-   Does the periodic check of low pressure fuel-gas cylinders include a
    close inspection of the cylinders' bottom?

HOIST and AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT

-   Is each overhead electric hoist equipped with a limit device to stop
    the hook travel at its highest and lowest point of safe travel?

-   Will each hoist automatically stop and hold any load up to 125
    percent of its rated load, if its actuating force is removed?

-   Is the rated load of each hoist legibly marked and visible to the
    operator?

-   Are stops provided at the safe limits of travel for trolley hoist?

-   Are the controls of hoists plainly marked to indicate the direction
    of travel or motion?

-   Is each cage-controlled hoist equipped with an effective warning
    device?

-   Are close-fitting guards or other suitable devices installed on
    hoist to assure hoist ropes will be maintained in the sheave groves?

-   Are all hoist chains or ropes of sufficient length to handle the
    full range of movement for the application while still maintaining
    two full wraps on the drum at all times?

-   Are nip points or contact points between hoist ropes and sheaves
    which are permanently located within seven feet of the floor, ground
    or working platform, guarded?

-   Is it prohibited to use chains or rope slings that are kinked or
    twisted?

-   Is it prohibited to use the hoist rope or chain wrapped around the
    load as a substitute, for a sling?

-   Is the operator instructed to avoid carrying loads over people?

-   Are only employees who have been trained in the proper use of hoists
    allowed to operate them?

INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS – FORKLIFTS

-   Are only trained personnel allowed to operate industrial trucks?

-   Is substantial overhead protective equipment provided on high lift
    rider equipment?

-   Are the required lift truck operating rules posted and enforced?

-   Is directional lighting provided on each industrial truck that
    operates in an area with less than two foot candles per square foot
    of general lighting?

-   Does each industrial truck have a warning horn, whistle, gong or
    other device which can be clearly heard above the normal noise in
    the areas where operated?

-   Are the brakes on each industrial truck capable of bringing the
    vehicle to a complete and safe stop when fully loaded?

-   Will the industrial truck's parking brake effectively prevent the
    vehicle from moving when unattended?

-   Are industrial trucks operating in areas where flammable gases or
    vapors, or combustible dust or ignitable fibers may be present in
    the atmosphere, approved for such locations?

-   Are motorized hand and hand/rider trucks so designed that the brakes
    are applied, and power to the drive motor shuts off when the
    operator releases his or her grip on the device that controls the
    travel?

-   Are industrial trucks with internal combustion engine operated in
    buildings or enclosed areas, carefully checked to ensure such
    operations do not cause harmful concentration of dangerous gases or
    fumes?

SPRAYING OPERATIONS

-   Is adequate ventilation assured before spray operations are started?

-   Is mechanical ventilation provided when spraying operation is done
    in enclosed areas?

-   When mechanical ventilation is provided during spraying operations,
    is it so arranged that it will not circulate the contaminated air?

-   Is the spray area free of hot surfaces?

-   Is the spray area at least 20 feet from flames, sparks, operating
    electrical motors and other ignition sources?

-   Are portable lamps used to illuminate spray areas suitable for use
    in a hazardous location?

-   Is approved respiratory equipment provided and used when appropriate
    during spraying operations?

-   Do solvents used for cleaning have a flash point of 100F or more?

-   Are fire control sprinkler heads kept clean?

-   Are "NO SMOKING" signs posted in spray areas, paint rooms, paint
    booths, and paint storage areas?

-   Is the spray area kept clean of combustible residue?

-   Are spray booths constructed of metal, masonry, or other substantial
    noncombustible material?

-   Are spray booth floors and baffles noncombustible and easily
    cleaned?

-   Is infrared drying apparatus kept out of the spray area during
    spraying operations?

-   Is the spray booth completely ventilated before using the drying
    apparatus?

-   Is the electric drying apparatus properly grounded?

-   Are lighting fixtures for spray booths located outside of the booth
    and the interior lighted through sealed clear panels?

-   Are the electric motors for exhaust fans placed outside booths or
    ducts?

-   Are belts and pulleys inside the booth fully enclosed?

-   Do ducts have access doors to allow cleaning?

-   Do all drying spaces have adequate ventilation?

ENTERING CONFINED SPACES

-   Are confined spaces thoroughly emptied of any corrosive or hazardous
    substances, such as acids or caustics, before entry?

-   Before entry, are all lines to a confined space, containing inert,
    toxic, flammable, or corrosive materials valved off and blanked or
    disconnected and separated?

-   Is it required that all impellers, agitators, or other moving
    equipment inside confined spaces be locked-out if they present a
    hazard?

-   Is either natural or mechanical ventilation provided prior to
    confined space entry?

-   Before entry, are appropriate atmospheric tests performed to check
    for oxygen deficiency, toxic substance and explosive concentrations
    in the confined space before entry?

-   Is adequate illumination provided for the work to be performed in
    the confined space?

-   Is the atmosphere inside the confined space frequently tested or
    continuously monitor during conduct of work?

-   Is there an assigned safety standby employee outside of the confined
    space whose sole responsibility is to watch the work in progress,
    sound an alarm if necessary, and give assistance?

-   Is the standby employee or other employees prohibited from entering
    the confined space without lifelines and respiratory equipment if an
    emergency’s cause is unknown?

-   In addition to the standby employee, is there at least one other
    trained rescuer in the vicinity?

-   Are all rescuers appropriately trained and using approved, recently
    inspected equipment?

-   Does all rescue equipment allow for lifting employees vertically
    from a top opening?

-   Are there trained personnel in First Aid and CPR immediately
    available?

-   Is there an effective communication system in place whenever
    respiratory equipment is used and the employee in the confined space
    is out of sight of the standby person?

-   Is approved respiratory equipment required if the atmosphere inside
    the confined space cannot be made acceptable?

-   Is all portable electrical equipment used inside confined spaces
    either grounded and insulated, or equipped with ground fault
    protection?

-   Before gas welding or burning is started in a confined space, are
    hoses checked for leaks, compressed gas bottles forbidden inside of
    the confined space, torches lighted only outside of the confined
    area and the confined area tested for an explosive atmosphere each
    time before a lighted torch is to be taken into the confined space?

-   If employees will be using oxygen-consuming equipment such as
    salamanders, torches, furnaces, in a confined space, is sufficient
    air provided to assure combustion without reducing the oxygen
    concentration of the atmosphere below 19.5 percent by volume?

-   Whenever combustion-type equipment is used in confined space, are
    provisions made to ensure the exhaust gases are vented outside of
    the enclosure?

-   Is each confined space checked for decaying vegetation or animal
    matter, which may produce methane?

-   Is the confined space checked for possible industrial waste, which
    could be toxic?

-   If the confined space is below the ground and near areas where motor
    vehicles will be operating, is it possible for vehicle exhaust or
    carbon monoxide to enter the space?

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS

-   Are all work areas properly illuminated?

-   Are employees instructed in proper first aid and other emergency
    procedures?

-   Are hazardous substances identified which may cause harm by
    inhalation, ingestion, skin absorption or contact?

-   Are employees aware of the hazards involved with the various
    chemicals they may be exposed to in their work environment, such as
    ammonia, chlorine, epoxies, and caustics?

-   Is employee exposure to chemicals in the workplace kept within
    acceptable levels?

-   Can a less harmful method or product be used?

-   Is the work area's ventilation system appropriate for the work being
    performed?

-   Are spray painting operations done in spray rooms or booths equipped
    with an appropriate exhaust system?

-   Is employee exposure to welding fumes controlled by ventilation, use
    of respirators, exposure time, or other means?

-   Are welders and other workers nearby provided with flash shields
    during welding operations?

-   If forklifts and other vehicles are used in buildings or other
    enclosed areas, are the carbon monoxide levels kept below maximum
    acceptable concentration?

-   Has there been a determination that noise levels in the facilities
    are within acceptable levels?

-   Are steps being taken to use engineering controls to reduce
    excessive noise levels?

-   Are proper precautions being taken when handling asbestos and other
    fibrous materials?

-   Are caution labels and signs used to warn of asbestos?

-   Are wet methods used, when practicable, to prevent the emission of
    airborne asbestos fibers, silica dust and similar hazardous
    materials?

-   Is vacuuming with appropriate equipment used whenever possible
    rather than blowing or sweeping dust?

-   Are grinders, saws, and other machines that produce respirable dusts
    vented to an industrial collector or central exhaust system?

-   Are all local exhaust ventilation systems designed and operating
    properly such as airflow and volume necessary for the application?

-   Are the ducts free of obstructions or the belts slipping?

-   Is personal protective equipment provided, used and maintained
    wherever required?

-   Are there written standard operating procedures for the selection
    and use of respirators where needed?

-   Are restrooms and washrooms kept clean and sanitary?

-   Is all water provided for drinking, washing, and cooking potable?

-   Are all outlets for water not suitable for drinking clearly
    identified?

-   Are employees' physical capacities assessed before being assigned to
    jobs requiring heavy work?

-   Are employees instructed in the proper manner of lifting heavy
    objects?

-   Where heat is a problem, have all fixed work areas been provided
    with spot cooling or air conditioning?

-   Are employees screened before assignment to areas of high heat to
    determine if their health condition might make them more susceptible
    to having an adverse reaction?

-   Are employees working on streets and roadways where they are exposed
    to the hazards of traffic, required to wear bright colored (traffic
    orange) warning vest?

-   Are exhaust stacks and air intakes located so that contaminated air
    will not be recirculated within a building or other enclosed area?

-   Is equipment producing ultra-violet radiation properly shielded?

FLAMMABLE and COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS

-   Are combustible scrap, debris and waste materials (i.e., oily rags)
    stored in covered metal receptacles and removed from the worksite
    promptly?

-   Is proper storage practiced to minimize the risk of fire including
    spontaneous combustion?

-   Are approved containers and tanks used for the storage and handling
    of flammable and combustible liquids?

-   Are all connections on drums and combustible liquid piping, vapor
    and liquid tight?

-   Are all flammable liquids kept in closed containers when not in use
    (e.g., parts cleaning tanks, pans)?

-   Are bulk drums of flammable liquids grounded and bonded to
    containers during dispensing?

-   Do storage rooms for flammable and combustible liquids have
    explosion-proof lights?

-   Do storage rooms for flammable and combustible liquids have
    mechanical or gravity ventilation?

-   Is liquefied petroleum gas stored, handled, and used in accordance
    with safe practices and standards?

-   Are liquefied petroleum storage tanks guarded to prevent damage from
    vehicles?

-   Are all solvent wastes and flammable liquids kept in fire- resistant
    covered containers until they are removed from the worksite?

-   Is vacuuming used whenever possible rather than blowing or sweeping
    combustible dust?

-   Are fire separators placed between containers of combustibles or
    flammables, when stacked one upon another, to ensure their support
    and stability?

-   Are fuel gas cylinders and oxygen cylinders separated by distance,
    fire resistant barriers, or other means while in storage?

-   Are fire extinguishers selected and provided for the types of
    materials in areas where they are to be used?

-   Class A: Ordinary combustible material fires

-   Class B: Flammable liquid, gas or grease fires

-   Class C: Energized-electrical equipment fires

-   If a Halon 1301 fire extinguisher is used, can employees evacuate
    within the specified time for that extinguisher?

-   Are appropriate fire extinguishers mounted within 75 feet of outside
    areas containing flammable liquids and within 10 feet of any inside
    storage area for such materials?

-   Is the transfer/withdrawal of flammable or combustible liquids
    performed by trained personnel?

-   Are fire extinguishers mounted so that employees do not have to
    travel more than 75 feet for a class "A" fire or 50 feet for a class
    "B" fire?

-   Are employees trained in the use of fire extinguishers?

-   Are extinguishers free from obstructions or blockage?

-   Are all extinguishers serviced, maintained and tagged at intervals
    not to exceed one year?

-   Are all extinguishers fully charged and in their designated places?

-   Is a record maintained of required monthly checks of extinguishers?

-   Where sprinkler systems are permanently installed, are the nozzle
    heads directed or arranged so that water will not be sprayed into
    operating electrical switchboards and equipment?

-   Are "NO SMOKING" signs posted where appropriate in areas where
    flammable or combustible materials are used or stored?

-   Are "NO SMOKING" signs posted on liquefied petroleum gas tanks?

-   Are "NO SMOKING" rules enforced in areas involving storage and use
    of flammable materials?

-   Are safety cans used for dispensing flammable or combustible liquids
    at a point of use?

-   Are all spills of flammable or combustible liquids cleaned up
    promptly?

-   Are storage tanks adequately vented to prevent the development of
    excessive vacuum or pressure as a result of filling, emptying, or
    atmosphere temperature changes?

-   Are storage tanks equipped with emergency venting that will relieve
    excessive internal pressure caused by fire exposure?

-   Are spare portable or butane tanks, which are sued by industrial
    trucks stored in accordance with regulations?

FIRE PROTECTION

-   Do you have a fire prevention plan?

-   Does your plan describe the type of fire protection equipment and
    systems?

-   Have you established practices and procedures to control potential
    fire hazards and ignition sources?

-   Are employees aware of the fire hazards of the material and
    processes to which they are exposed?

-   Is your local fire department well acquainted with your facilities,
    location, and specific hazards?

-   If you have a fire alarm system, is it tested at least annually?

-   If you have a fire alarm system, is it certified as required?

-   If you have interior standpipes and valves, are they inspected
    regularly?

-   If you have outside private fire hydrants, are they flushed at least
    once a year and on a routine preventive maintenance schedule?

-   Are fire doors and shutters in good operating condition?

-   Are fire doors and shutters unobstructed and protected against
    obstructions, including their counterweights?

-   Are fire door and shutter fusible links in place?

-   Are automatic sprinkler system water control valves, air and water
    pressures checked weekly/periodically as required?

-   Is maintenance of automatic sprinkler system assigned to responsible
    persons or to a sprinkler contractor?

-   Are sprinkler heads protected by metal guards, when exposed to
    physical damage?

-   Is proper clearance maintained below sprinkler heads?

-   Are portable fire extinguishers provided in adequate number and
    type?

-   Are fire extinguishers mounted in readily accessible locations?

-   Are fire extinguishers recharged regularly and noted on the
    inspection tag?

-   Are employees periodically instructed in the use of extinguishers
    and fire protection procedures?

HAZARDOUS CHEMICAL EXPOSURES

-   Are employees trained in the safe handling practices of hazardous
    chemicals such as acids, caustics, and the like?

-   Are employees aware of the potential hazards involving various
    chemicals stored or used in the workplace--such as acids, bases,
    caustics, epoxies, and phenols?

-   Is employee exposure to chemicals kept within acceptable levels?

-   Are eye wash fountains and safety showers provided in areas where
    corrosive chemicals are handled?

-   Are all containers, such as vats and storage tanks labeled as to
    their contents (e.g., "CAUSTICS")?

-   Are all employees required to use personal protective clothing and
    equipment when handling chemicals (e.g., gloves, eye protection, and
    respirators)?

-   Are flammable or toxic chemicals kept in closed containers when not
    in use?

-   Are chemical piping systems clearly marked as to their content?

-   Where corrosive liquids are frequently handled in open containers or
    drawn from storage vessels or pipelines, are adequate means readily
    available for neutralizing or disposing of spills or overflows
    properly and safely?

-   Have standard operating procedures been established and are they
    being followed when cleaning up chemical spills?

-   Where needed for emergency use, are respirators stored in a
    convenient, clean and sanitary location?

-   Are respirators intended for emergency use adequate for the various
    uses for which they may be needed?

-   Are employees prohibited from eating in areas where hazardous
    chemicals are present?

-   Is personal protective equipment provided, used and maintained
    whenever necessary?

-   Are there written standard operating procedures for the selection
    and use of respirators where needed?

-   If you have a respirator protection program, are your employees
    instructed on the correct usage and limitations of the respirators?

-   Are the respirators NIOSH approved for this particular application?

-   Are they regularly inspected and cleaned sanitized and maintained?

-   If hazardous substances are used in your processes, do you have a
    medical or biological monitoring system in operation?

-   Are you familiar with the Threshold Limit Values or Permissible
    Exposure Limits of airborne contaminants and physical agents used in
    your workplace?

-   Have control procedures been instituted for hazardous materials,
    where appropriate, such as respirators, ventilation systems,
    handling practices, and the like?

-   Whenever possible, are hazardous substances handled in properly
    designed and exhausted booths or similar locations?

-   Do you use general dilution or local exhaust ventilation systems to
    control dusts, vapors, gases, fumes, smoke, solvents or mists which
    may be generated in your workplace?

-   Is ventilation equipment provided for removal of contaminants from
    such operations as production grinding, buffing, spray painting, or
    vapor decreasing, and is it operating properly?

-   Do employees complain about dizziness, headaches, nausea,
    irritation, or other factors of discomfort when they use solvents or
    other chemicals?

-   Is there a dermatitis problem? Do employees complain about skin
    dryness, irritation, or sensitization?

-   Have you considered the use of an industrial hygienist or
    environmental health specialist to evaluate your operation?

-   If internal combustion engines are used, is carbon monoxide kept
    within acceptable levels?

-   Is vacuuming used, rather than blowing or sweeping dusts whenever
    possible for clean up?

-   Are materials that give off toxic asphyxiant, suffocating, or
    anesthetic fumes stored in remote or isolated locations when not in
    use?

HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES COMMUNICATION

-   Is there a list of hazardous substances used in your workplace?

-   Is there a written hazard communication program dealing with Safety
    Data Sheets (SDS) labeling, and employee training?

-   Who is responsible for SDS, container labeling, employee training?

-   Is each container for a hazardous substance (i.e., vats, bottles,
    storage tanks,) labeled with product identity and a hazard warning
    (communication of the specific health hazards and physical hazards)?

-   Is there a Material Safety Data Sheet readily available for each
    hazardous substance used?

-   How will you inform other employers whose employees share the same
    work area where the hazardous substances are used?

-   Is there an employee training program for hazardous substances?

Does this program include the following?

-   An explanation of what an SDS is and how to use and obtain one

-   SDS contents for each hazardous substance or class of substances

-   Explanation of "Right to Know”

-   Identification of where employees can see the employer's written
      hazard communication program and where hazardous substances are
      present in their work area

-   The physical and health hazards of substances in the work area, how
      to detect their presence, and specific protective measures to be
      used

-   Details of the hazard communication program, including how to use
      the labeling system and SDS

-   How employees will be informed of hazards of non-routine tasks, and
      hazards of unlabeled pipes

ELECTRICAL

-   Are your workplace electricians familiar with the OSHA Electrical
    Safety Orders?

-   Do you specify compliance with OSHA for all contract electrical
    work?

-   Are all employees required to report as soon as practicable any
    obvious hazard to life or property observed in connection with
    electrical equipment or lines?

-   Are employees instructed to make preliminary inspections and
    appropriate tests to determine what conditions exist before starting
    work on electrical equipment or lines?

-   When electrical equipment or lines are to be serviced, maintained or
    adjusted, are necessary switches opened, locked-out and tagged
    whenever possible?

-   Are portable electrical tools and equipment grounded or of the
    double insulated type?

-   Are electrical appliances such as vacuum cleaners, polishers,
    vending machines grounded?

-   Do extension cords being used have a grounding conductor?

-   Are multiple plug adapters prohibited?

-   Are ground-fault circuit interrupters installed on each temporary 15
    or 20 ampere, 120 volt AC circuit at locations where construction,
    demolition, modifications, alterations or excavations are being
    performed?

-   Are all temporary circuits protected by suitable disconnecting
    switches or plug connectors at the junction with permanent wiring?

-   Is exposed wiring and cords with frayed or deteriorated insulation
    repaired or replaced promptly?

-   Are flexible cords and cables free of splices or taps?

-   Are clamps or other securing means provided on flexible cords or
    cables at plugs, receptacles, tools, and equipment and is the cord
    jacket securely held in place?

-   Are all cord, cable, and raceway connections intact and secure?

-   In wet or damp locations, are electrical tools and equipment
    appropriate for the use or location or otherwise protected?

-   Is the location of electrical power lines and cables (overhead,
    underground, under-floor, other side of walls) determined before
    digging, drilling or similar work is begun?

-   Are metal measuring tapes, ropes, hand lines, or similar devices
    with metallic thread woven into the fabric prohibited where they
    could come in contact with energized parts of equipment or circuit
    conductors?

-   Is the use of metal ladders prohibited in area where the ladder or
    the person using the ladder could come in contact with energized
    parts of equipment, fixtures or circuit conductors?

-   Are all disconnecting switches and circuit breakers labeled to
    indicate their use or equipment served?

-   Are disconnecting means always opened before fuses are replaced?

-   Do all interior wiring systems include provisions for grounding
    metal parts of electrical raceways, equipment and enclosures?

-   Are all electrical raceways and enclosures securely fastened in
    place?

-   Are all energized parts of electrical circuits and equipment guarded
    against accidental contact by approved cabinets or enclosures?

-   Is sufficient access and working space provided and maintained about
    all electrical equipment to permit ready and safe operations and
    maintenance?

-   Are all unused openings (including conduit knockouts) in electrical
    enclosures and fittings closed with appropriate covers, plugs or
    plates?

-   Are electrical enclosures such as switches, receptacles, junction
    boxes, etc., provided with tight-fitting covers or plates?

-   Are disconnecting switches for electrical motors in excess of two
    horsepower, capable of opening the circuit when the motor is in a
    stalled condition, without exploding? (Switches must be horsepower
    rated equal to or in excess of the motor hp rating).

-   Is low voltage protection provided in the control device of motors
    driving machines or equipment, which could cause probably injury
    from inadvertent starting?

-   Is each motor disconnecting switch or circuit breaker located within
    sight of the motor control device?

-   Is each motor located within sight of its controller or the
    controller disconnecting means capable of being locked in the open
    position or is a separate disconnecting means installed in the
    circuit within sight of the motor?

-   Is the controller for each motor in excess of two horsepower, rated
    in horsepower equal to or in excess of the rating of the motor is
    serves?

-   Are employees who regularly work on or around energized electrical
    equipment or lines instructed in the cardiopulmonary resuscitation
    (CPR) methods?

-   Are employees prohibited from working alone on energized lines or
    equipment over 600 volts?

NOISE

-   Are there areas in the workplace where continuous noise levels
    exceed 85 dBA? (To determine maximum allowable levels for
    intermittent or impact noise, see Title 8, Section 5097.)

-   Are noise levels being measured using a sound level meter or an
    octave band analyzer and records being kept?

-   Have you tried isolating noisy machinery from the rest of your
    operation?

-   Have engineering controls been used to reduce excessive noise
    levels?

-   Where engineering controls are determined not feasible, are
    administrative controls (i.e., worker rotation) being used to
    minimize individual employee exposure to noise?

-   Is there an ongoing preventive health program to educate employees
    in safe levels of noise and exposure, effects of noise on their
    health, and use of personal protection?

-   Is the training repeated annually for employees exposed to
    continuous noise above 85 dBA?

-   Have work areas where noise levels make voice communication between
    employees difficult been identified and posted?

-   Is approved hearing protective equipment (noise attenuating devices)
    available to every employee working in areas where continuous noise
    levels exceed 85 dBA?

-   If you use ear protectors, are employees properly fitted and
    instructed in their use and care?

-   Are employees exposed to continuous noise above 85 dBA given
    periodic audiometric testing to ensure that you have an effective
    hearing protection system?

FUELING

-   Is it prohibited to fuel an internal combustion engine with a
    flammable liquid while the engine is running?

-   Are fueling operations done in such a manner that likelihood of
    spillage will be minimal?

-   When spillage occurs during fueling operations, is the spilled fuel
    cleaned up completely, evaporated, or other measures taken to
    control vapors before restarting the engine?

-   Are fuel tank caps replaced and secured before starting the engine?

-   In fueling operations is there always metal contact between the
    container and fuel tank?

-   Are fueling hoses of a type designed to handle the specific type of
    fuel?

-   Is it prohibited to handle or transfer gasoline in open containers?

-   Are open lights, open flames, or sparking or arcing equipment
    prohibited near fueling or transfer of fuel operations?

-   Is smoking prohibited in the vicinity of fueling operations?

-   Are fueling operations prohibited in building or other enclosed
    areas that are not specifically ventilated for this purpose?

-   Where fueling or transfer of fuel is done through a gravity flow
    system, are the nozzles of the self-closing type?

IDENTIFICATION OF PIPING SYSTEMS

-   When non-potable water is piped through a facility, are outlets or
    taps posted to alert employees that it is unsafe and not to be used
    for drinking, washing or other personal use?

-   When hazardous substances are transported through above ground
    piping, is each pipeline identified at points where confusion could
    introduce hazards to employees?

-   When pipelines are identified by color painting, are all visible
    parts of the line so identified?

-   When pipelines are identified by color painted bands or tapes, are
    the bands or tapes located at reasonable intervals and at each
    outlet, valve or connection?

-   When pipelines are identified by color, is the color code posted at
    all locations where confusion could introduce hazards to employees?

-   When the contents of pipelines are identified by name or name
    abbreviation, is the information readily visible on the pipe near
    each valve or outlet?

-   When pipelines carrying hazardous substances are identified by tags,
    are the tags constructed of durable materials, the message carried
    clearly ad permanently distinguishable and are tags installed at
    each valve or outlet?

-   When pipelines are heated by electricity, steam or other external
    source, are suitable warning signs or tags placed at unions, valves,
    or other serviceable parts of the system?

MATERIAL HANDLING

-   Is there safe clearance for equipment through aisles and doorways?

-   Are aisleways designated, permanently marked, and kept clear to
    allow unhindered passage?

-   Are motorized vehicles and mechanized equipment inspected daily or
    prior to use?

-   Are vehicles shut off and brakes set prior to loading or unloading?

-   Are containers or combustibles or flammables, when stacked while
    being moved, always separated by dunnage sufficient to provide
    stability?

-   Are dock boards (bridge plates) used when loading or unloading
    operations are taking place between vehicles and docks?

-   Are trucks and trailers secured from movement during loading and
    unloading operations?

-   Are dock plates and loading ramps constructed and maintained with
    sufficient strength to support imposed loading?

-   Are hand trucks maintained in safe operating condition?

-   Are chutes equipped with sideboards of sufficient height to prevent
    the materials being handled from falling off?

-   Are chutes and gravity roller sections firmly placed or secured to
    prevent displacement?

-   At the delivery end of rollers or chutes, are provisions made to
    brake the movement of the handled materials?

-   Are pallets usually inspected before being loaded or moved?

-   Are hooks with safety latches or other arrangements used when
    hoisting materials so that slings or load attachments won't
    accidentally slip off the hoist hooks?

-   Are securing chains, ropes, chocks, or slings adequate for the job
    to be performed?

-   When hoisting material or equipment, do provisions prevent passing
    under suspended loads?

-   Are Safety Data Sheets available to employees handling hazardous
    substances?

TRANSPORTING EMPLOYEES and MATERIALS

-   Do employees who operate vehicles on public thoroughfares have valid
    operator's licenses?

-   When seven or more employees are regularly transported in a van, bus
    or truck, is the operator's license appropriate for the class of
    vehicle being driven?

-   Is each van, bus or truck used regularly to transport employees,
    equipped with an adequate number of seats?

-   When employees are transported by truck, are provision provided to
    prevent their falling from the vehicle?

-   Are vehicles used to transport employees, equipped with lamps,
    brakes, horns, mirrors, windshields and turn signals in good repair?

-   Are transport vehicles provided with handrails, steps, stirrups or
    similar devices, so placed and arranged that employees can safely
    mount or dismount?

-   Are employee transport vehicles equipped at all times with at least
    two reflective-type flares?

-   Is a fully charged fire extinguisher, in good condition, and with at
    least 4 B:C rating maintained in each employee transport vehicle?

-   When cutting tools with sharp edges are carried in passenger
    compartments of employee transport vehicles, are they placed in
    closed boxes or containers which are secured in place?

-   Are employees prohibited from riding on top of any load, which can
    shift, topple, or otherwise become unstable?

CONTROL OF HARMFUL SUBSTANCES BY VENTILATION

-   Is the volume and velocity of air in each exhaust system sufficient
    to gather the dusts, fumes, mists, vapors or gases to be controlled,
    and to convey them to a suitable point of disposal?

-   Are exhaust inlets, ducts and plenums designed, constructed, and
    supported to prevent collapse or failure of any part of the system?

-   Are clean-out ports or doors provided at intervals not to exceed 12
    feet in all horizontal runs of exhaust ducts?

-   Where two or more different types of operations are being controlled
    through the same exhaust system, will the combination of substances
    being controlled constitute a fire, explosion or chemical reaction
    hazard in the duct?

-   Is adequate makeup air provided to areas where exhaust systems are
    operating?

-   Is the intake for makeup air located so that only clean, fresh air,
    which is free of contaminates, will enter the work environment?

-   Where two or more ventilation systems are serving a work area, is
    their operation such that one will not offset the functions of the
    other?

SANITIZING EQUIPMENT and CLOTHING

-   Is personal protective clothing or equipment, that employees are
    required to wear or use, of a type capable of being easily cleaned
    and disinfected?

-   Are employees prohibited from interchanging personal protective
    clothing or equipment, unless it has been properly cleaned?

-   Are machines and equipment that process, handle, or apply materials
    that could be injurious to employees cleaned and decontaminated
    before being overhauled or placed in storage?

-   Are employees prohibited from smoking or eating in any area where
    contaminates are present that could be injurious if ingested?

-   When employees are required to change from street clothing into
    protective clothing, is a clean change room with a separate storage
    facility for street and protective clothing provided?

-   Are employees required to shower and wash their hair as soon as
    possible after a known contact has occurred with a carcinogen?

-   Are equipment, materials, or other items taken into or removed from
    a carcinogen-regulated area in a way that prevents contaminating
    non-regulated areas or the external environment?

TIRE INFLATION

-   Where tires are mounted or inflated on drop center wheels, is a safe
    practice procedure posted and enforced?

-   Where tires are mounted or inflated on wheels with split rims or
    retainer rings, is a safe practice procedure posted and enforced?

-   Does each tire inflation hose have a clip-on chuck with at least 24
    inches of hose between the chuck and an in-line hand valve and
    gauge?

-   Does the tire inflation control valve automatically shut off airflow
    when the valve is released?

-   Is a tire restraining device such as a cage, rack or other effective
    means used while inflating tires mounted on split rims, or rims
    using retainer rings?

-   Are employees forbidden from positioning directly over or in front
    of a tire while it's inflated?

EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN

-   Are you required to have an emergency action plan?

-   Does the emergency action plan comply with requirements of T8CCR
    3220(a)?

-   Have emergency escape procedures and routes been developed and
    communicated to all employers?

-   Do employees, who remain to operate critical plant operations before
    they evacuate, know the proper procedures?

-   Is the employee alarm system that provides a warning for emergency
    action recognizable and perceptible above ambient conditions?

-   Are alarm systems properly maintained and tested regularly?

-   Is the emergency action plan reviewed and revised periodically?

Do employees know their responsibilities:

-   For reporting emergencies?

-   During an emergency?

-   For conducting rescue and medical duties?

INFECTION CONTROL

-   Are employees potentially exposed to infectious agents in body
    fluids?

-   Have occasions of potential occupational exposure been identified
    and documented?

-   Has a training and information program been provided for employees
    exposed to or potentially exposed to blood or body fluids?

-   Have infection control procedures been instituted where appropriate,
    such as ventilation, universal precautions, workplace practices, and
    personal protective equipment?

-   Are employees aware of specific workplace practices to follow when
    appropriate? (Hand washing, handling sharp instruments, handling of
    laundry, disposal of contaminated materials, reusable equipment.)

-   Is personal protective equipment provided to employees, and in all
    appropriate locations?

-   Is the necessary equipment (i.e., mouthpieces, resuscitation bags,
    and other ventilation devices) provided for administering
    mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on potentially infected patients?

-   Are facilities and equipment that comply with workplace practices
    available, such as hand-washing sinks, biohazard tags and labels,
    needle containers, detergents/disinfectants to clean up spills?

-   Are all equipment and environmental and working surfaces cleaned and
    disinfected after contact with blood or potentially infectious
    materials?

-   Is infectious waste placed in closable, leak proof containers, bags
    or puncture-resistant holders with proper labels?

-   Has medical surveillance including HBV evaluation, antibody testing
    and vaccination been made available to potentially exposed
    employees?

-   Is there training on universal precautions?

-   Is there training on personal protective equipment?

-   Is there training on workplace practices, which should include blood
    drawing, room cleaning, laundry handling, clean-up of blood spills?

-   Is there training on needle stick exposure and management?

-   Do employees have current Hepatitis B vaccinations?

ERGONOMICS

-   Can the work be performed without eyestrain or glare to the
    employees?

-   Does the task require prolonged raising of the arms?

-   Do the neck and shoulders have to be stooped to view the task?

-   Are there pressure points on any parts of the body (wrists,
    forearms, back of thighs)?

-   Can the work be done using the larger muscles of the body?

-   Can the work be done without twisting or overly bending the lower
    back?

-   Are there sufficient rest breaks, in addition to the regular rest
    breaks, to relieve stress from repetitive-motion tasks?

-   Are tools, instruments and machinery shaped, positioned and handled
    so that tasks can be performed comfortably?

-   Are all pieces of furniture adjusted, positioned and arranged to
    minimize strain on all parts of the body?

VENTILATION FOR INDOOR AIR QUALITY

-   Does your HVAC system provide at least the quantity of outdoor air
    required by the local building codes?

-   Is the HVAC system inspected at least annually and problems
    corrected?

-   Are inspection records retained for at least five years?

CRANE CHECKLIST

-   Are the cranes visually inspected for defective components prior to
    the beginning of any work shift?

-   Are all electrically operated cranes effectively grounded?

-   Is a crane preventive maintenance program established?

-   Is the load chart clearly visible to the operator?

-   Are operating controls clearly identified?

-   Is a fire extinguisher provided at the operator's station?

-   Is the rated capacity visibly marked on each crane?

-   Is an audible warning device mounted on each crane?

-   Is sufficient illumination provided for the operator to perform the
    work safely?

-   Are cranes of such design that the boom could fall over backward
    equipped with boom stops?

-   Does each crane have a certificate indicating that required testing
    and examinations have been performed?

-   Are crane inspection and maintenance records maintained and
    available for inspection?

ATTACHMENT J.2.—HAZARD ASSESSMENT AND CORRECTION RECORD

Date of Inspection: Person Conducting Inspection:

Unsafe Condition or Work Practice:

Corrective Action Taken:

Date of Inspection: Person Conducting Inspection:

Unsafe Condition or Work Practice:

Corrective Action Taken:

ATTACHMENT J.3.—ACCIDENT/EXPOSURE INVESTIGATION REPORT

Date and Time of Accident: Location:

Accident Description:

Employees Involved:

Preventative Action Recommendations:

Corrective Actions Taken:

Manager Responsible: Date Completed:

ATTACHMENT J.4.—WORKER TRAINING AND INSTRUCTION RECORD

  EMPLOYEE NAME   TRAINING DATES   TYPE OF TRAINING   TRAINERS
  --------------- ---------------- ------------------ ----------
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      

APPENDIX K:

POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCK

(FORKLIFT) SAFETY PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.178

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE

2.  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

    a.  [Health and Safety Officer Title] Responsibilities

    b.  Supervisor Responsibilities

    c.  Powered Industrial Truck Operator Responsibilities

3.  DEFINITION OF TERMS

4.  PROGRAM ELEMENTS

    a.  General Requirements

    b.  Safety Guards

    c.  Battery Maintenance

    d.  Fuel Handing and Storage

    e.  Control of Noxious Gases and Fumes

    f.  Routine Inspection and Maintenance

    g.  Safe Operating Rules

    h.  Training Requirements

ATTACHMENT K.1.—FORKLIFT INSPECTION FORM

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

The purpose of this Powered Industrial Truck Program is to protect the
health and safety of all employees assigned to operate powered
industrial trucks and to comply with the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.178
(Powered Industrial Trucks).

PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION 

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] Responsibilities

The [Health and Safety Officer Title] will be responsible for the
following:

-   Developing specific policies and procedures pertaining to the
      operation and maintenance of powered industrial trucks.

-   Implementing a training program based on the general principles of
      safe truck operation, the type of vehicle(s) being used in the
      workplace, the hazards of the workplace created by the use of the
      vehicle(s)

-   Coordinating the training and performance testing of Powered
      industrial truck operators.

-   Maintaining the training certification records and performance tests
      of employees included in the training sessions.

-   Periodically reviewing the effectiveness of the program.

Supervisor Responsibilities

Managers and Supervisors are responsible for:

-   Ensuring that employees who operate powered industrial trucks in
      their departments have received appropriate training

-   Providing observations and feedback to operators to ensure safe
      equipment operation

-   Ensuring that the vehicles under their responsibility are properly
      inspected and maintained in safe operating condition

-   Ensuring that the vehicles under their responsibility are properly
      inspected and maintained in safe operating condition

Powered Industrial Truck Operator Responsibilities

-   Operating powered industrial trucks in a safe manner.

-   Inspecting powdered industrial trucks at the beginning of each work
      shift and completing the appropriate inspection forms if
      requested.

-   Reporting equipment defects and maintenance needs to their
      supervisors immediately.

DEFINITION OF TERMS

The following terms are associated with the design, type and use of
powered industrial trucks:

-   Backrest: Supports the load when tipped back and adds stability.

-   Carriage: The part of the mast where the forks and backrest are
    mounted.

-   Counterbalance Forklifts: Designed for both indoor and outdoor use,
    counterbalance truck wheels as their center of gravity and can be
    powered by battery, propane, gasoline or diesel fuel.

-   Full-tapered Forks: Forks that gradually increase in thickness from
    the tip of the fork all the way back to the fork’s heel (rear).
    Full-tapered forks are used to lift lighter loads.

-   Half-tapered forks: Forks that gradually increase in thickness from
    the tip of the fork (front) to about midway back where the blade
    reaches its maximum thickness. Half-tapered forks are used to lift
    heavier loads.

-   Identification Plate: Contains information about the truck’s design
    and capacity including information about the truck’s engine, load
    capacity, serial number, weight and the truck’s type designation.
    The identification plate may also contain additional information
    specific to that type of truck.

-   Lift Cylinders: Hydraulically operated single acting cylinders used
    to lift the carriage.

-   Load Center: The distance from the heels of the forks to the load’s
    center of gravity.

-   Mast: The mechanism on the truck that raises and lowers the load.
    The mast is made up of a set of tracks that house bearings and
    chains.

-   Material Handling: Any activity that involves picking up and moving
    materials, parts, or finished products.

-   Powered Industrial Truck: An industrial vehicle used to carry, push,
    pull, lift or stack material that is powered by an electric motor or
    an internal combustion engine. Included are vehicles that are
    commonly referred to as forklift trucks, rider trucks, motorized or
    powered hand trucks, pallet trucks and tugs. Not included is
    compressed air or nonflammable compressed gas-operated industrial
    trucks, farm vehicles or vehicles intended primarily for earth
    moving or over-the-road hauling.

-   Powered Pallet Jack: A type of powered industrial truck designed to
    move palletized materials. These trucks may be called walkies or
    walkie riders.

-   Order Picker: A type of truck designed to allow the operator to ride
    up and down the load so that individual items can be pulled form a
    rack or storage self.

-   Overhead Guard: A guard over the operator’s head that protects the
    operator from falling debris.

NOTE: The overhead guard is not designed to withstand the full impact of
falling objects.

-   Rated Capacity: The maximum weight that the truck is designed to
    lift as determined by the manufacture. To lift the maximum rated
    capacity, the load must be as close as possible to the drive wheels.
    The rated capacity of a truck can be found on the Identification
    Plate on the vehicle and in the manufacturer’s operator manual.

-   Side Stability: Refers to the truck’s ability to resist tipping
    sideways under various loaded and unloaded conditions.

-   Tilt Cylinders: Hydraulically operated double acting cylinders used
    to tilt the backrest and forks. Tilt cylinders work in both forward
    and backward directions.

-   Type Designation: Refers to the truck’s power source (diesel, gas,
    electric or liquefied propane gas) and if the truck is equipped with
    any additional safeguards to the exhaust, fuel, or electrical
    systems. The designation will also indicate any locations where the
    truck may not be used such as in atmospheres containing flammable
    vapors or dusts.

The following definitions help to explain the principle of stability.

-   Center of gravity is a point on an object at which all of the
    object's weight can be considered to be concentrated.

-   Counterweight is the weight that is a part of the truck's basic
    structure that is used to offset the load's weight and to maximize
    the vehicle's resistance to tipping over.

-   Fulcrum is the truck's axis of rotation when it tips over.

-   Grade is a surface's slope that is usually measured as the number of
    feet of rise or fall over a hundred foot horizontal distance
    (measured as a per cent).

-   Lateral stability is a truck's resistance to tipping over sideways.

-   Line of action is an imaginary line through an object's center of
    gravity.

-   Load center is the horizontal distance from the load's edge (or the
    fork's or other attachment's vertical face) to the line of action
    through the load's center of gravity.

-   Longitudinal stability is the truck's resistance to overturning
    forward or rearward.

-   Moment is the object's weight times the distance form a fixed point.
    In the case of a powered industrial truck, the distance is measured
    from the point that the truck will tip over to the object's line of
    action. The distance is always measured perpendicular to the line of
    action.

-   Track is the distance between wheels on the vehicle's same axle.

-   Wheelbase is the distance between the centerline of the vehicle's
    front and rear wheels.

PROGRAM ELEMENTS

General Requirements

Selection:

-   If the load to be handled is such that it presents a hazard to the
      operator (for instance, boxes falling from a pallet during
      travel), the manufacturer will install a vertical load backrest.

-   A vehicle used in dim areas of the plant will come equipped with its
      own light (including vehicles that are used to load semi-trucks).

-   Nameplates and markings on powered industrial trucks should remain
      intact and should be maintained in legible condition. The
      manufacturer’s written approval must be obtained for any
      modifications that affect truck capacity or safe operation. If a
      modification is made, the capacity, operation and maintenance
      instruction plates, tags or decals should be changed.

-   Prior to using a truck in each area of the plant, the atmosphere or
      location should be classified as to whether it is hazardous or
      nonhazardous. The type of industrial truck used in each area is
      dependent on this classification. Only approved industrial trucks
      should be used in hazardous locations.

Safety Guards

The following safety guards should be provided on powered industrial
trucks:

-   Enclosure Guards: All hazardous moving parts should be guarded, such
      as exposed gears and chain-and-sprocket drives. Tires should also
      be guarded to prevent objects from being propelled toward the
      operator.

-   Overhead Guard: An overhead guard should be provided where there is
      a danger of falling objects or where loads are lifted higher the
      operator’s head. These guards should extend beyond the operator’s
      position.

-   Vertical Load Backrest Extension: A load backrest extension should
      be provided when the type of load present a hazard to the
      operator.

Battery Maintenance

The following safety rules should be followed when charging/changing
batteries:

-   Batteries should be charged only in the battery charging area.

-   Trucks should be properly positioned and the brake applied before
      attempting to change or charge batteries. Material handling
      equipment should be provided for handling batteries.

-   Facilities should be provided for:

    -   Flushing and neutralizing spilled electrolyte

    -   Fire protection

    -   Protecting charging apparatus from damage by trucks

    -   Ventilation for dispersal of fumes from gassing batteries

-   A carboy tilter or siphon should be provided for handling
      electrolyte.

-   When changing batteries, acid should be poured into water; water
      should not be poured into acid.

-   Ensure that vent caps are functioning. The battery or compartment
      covers should be open to dissipate heat.

-   Take precautions to prevent open flames, sparks or electric arcs in
      the battery charging area.

-   Smoking is prohibited in the charging area.

-   Keep tools and metallic objects away from the top of uncovered
      batteries.

-   Make sure that reinstalled batteries are properly positioned and
      secured in the truck.

Fuel Handling and Storage

Liquid fuels (gasoline, diesel fuel) should be handled and stored in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Flammable
and Combustible Liquids Code (NFPA No. 30).

Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) should be handled and stored in accordance
with NFPA Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases (NFPA No.
58).

-   The engine should be stopped and the driver should dismount the
      vehicle before a truck is refueled.

-   Fuel tanks will not be filled while the engine is running. Spillage
      will be avoided. Refueling must be performed out of all buildings
      and away from open doors.

-   Spillage of oil or fuel will be carefully washed away or completely
      evaporated and the fuel tank cap replaced before restarting
      engine.

-   No forklift will be operated with a leak in the fuel system until
      the leak has been corrected.

Control of Noxious Gases and Fumes

Concentration levels of carbon monoxide gas created by powered
industrial trucks should not exceed levels specified in 29 CFR
1910.1000. Currently, the 8-hour time weighted average limit is 50 parts
per million (ppm). Industrial hygiene sampling should be conducted to
verify carbon monoxide levels.

To control the levels of carbon monoxide in the plant, gasoline engines
should not be idled in enclosed areas for long periods of time.

Routine Inspection and Maintenance

-   Operators will be held responsible for checking the mechanical
      condition of their trucks at the start of each shift or before
      initial use.

-   Operators will be instructed never to make adjustments or repairs on
      trucks, but to promptly report any faulty mechanical condition to
      maintenance for repair.

-   Maintenance employees will make a thorough mechanical inspection of
      all trucks at least once a month, at which time necessary repair
      and parts replacement will be made.

-   If at any time a powered industrial forklift is found to be in need
      of repair, defective or in any way unsafe, the truck will be taken
      out of service until it has been restored to safe operating
      condition.

-   Open flames will not be used for checking electrolyte level in
      storage batteries or gasoline level in fuel tanks.

-   Storage batteries used for electric-powered trucks require regular
      maintenance and charging. Adequate ventilation, emergency eyewash
      stations, and other appropriate equipment will be provided.
      Employees will be trained in the proper procedures to handle and
      charge batteries and to handle acids.

-   All powered industrial trucks should be maintained in safe operating
      condition at all times. Maintenance activities should include
      regular inspections, preventive maintenance and overhauls when
      necessary. Trucks that are not in safe operating condition should
      be removed from service until repairs are made. Repairs should be
      made only by authorized personnel.

-   Powered industrial truck operators should inspect their trucks at
      the beginning of their shift. The operators should check the
      controls, tires, brakes, and other moving parts. A standardized
      operator’s checklist should be used for these inspections. (A
      sample form is located at the end of this section.)

-   Documentation should be maintained of all inspection and maintenance
      activities. A file containing the maintenance and inspection
      records should be maintained for each truck.

Safe Operating Rules

Because of the hazards involved with powered industrial vehicle
operations, the following safe operating practices have been developed
to ensure that authorized employees drive in a safe manner.

I.  General

-   Safeguard the pedestrian at all times.

-   When leaving a vehicle unattended (definition: vehicle not in view
      or is in view, but is more than 25 feet away), the operator should
      ensure the following:

-   Forks will be fully lowered.

-   The transmission is in neutral.

-   Power shut off.

-   Brakes set and key or connector plug is removed.

-   Wheels are chocked if the truck is parked on an incline.

-   A safe distance will be maintained from the edge of ramps or
      platforms while on any elevated dock, platform or freight car.
      Vehicles will not be used for opening or closing doors.

-   Brakes will be set and wheel chocks will be in place to prevent
      movement of trucks, trailers or railroad cars while loading or
      unloading. Fixed jacks may be necessary to support semi-trailer
      during loading or unloading when the trailer is not coupled to a
      tractor. The flooring of the trucks, trailers and railroad cars
      will be checked for breaks and weakness before they are entered
      with a vehicle.

-   An overhead guard will be used as protection against falling
      objects.

-   A load backrest extension should always be used to minimize the
      possibility of the load or part of it from falling forward.

-   Fire aisles, fire doors, access to stairways, and fire equipment and
      emergency exits will always be kept clear.

-   Any vehicle with hydraulically controlled attachments should only be
      used for which it was designed.

-   Vehicles will not be driven up to anyone standing in front of a
      fixed object.

-   The driver will never place his or her arms or legs between the
      uprights of the mast or outside the running lines of the vehicle.

-   No person will be allowed to stand or pass under the elevated
      portion of any vehicle whether loaded or empty.

-   Unauthorized personnel will not be permitted to ride on powered
      industrial vehicles.

-   The driver will never push one load with another load.

-   Spinner knobs must not be attached to steering hand wheels of trucks
      not originally equipped with such.

-   Vehicles will never be used to lift people unless you have a
      properly designed safety platform securely attached to the forks
      and the mast.

-   Dock boards or bridge plates will be properly secured before they
      are driven over. Dock board or bridge plates will be driven over
      carefully and slowly and their rate capacity never exceeded.

-   Elevators will be approached slowly and then entered squarely after
      the elevator car is properly leveled. Once on the elevator, the
      transmission will be in neutral, the engine shut off and the
      brakes set.

-   Never pick up loads in excess of the rated capacity of the vehicle.

II. Traveling

-   All traffic regulations will be observed, including observing all
      stop signs and yield signs.

-   The driver must always slow down and sound the horn at cross aisles
      and when approaching blind corners, intersections or other
      locations where vision is obstructed.

-   A safe distance under normal conditions will be maintained
      approximately three vehicle lengths from the truck ahead.

-   The driver should always keep to the right of the aisle when
      possible.

-   If the load being carried obstructs forward view, the driver must
      travel in reverse.

-   Railroad tracks will be crossed diagonally whenever possible.
      Parking closer than eight feet from the center of the railroad
      tracks is prohibited.

-   Grades will be ascended or descended slowly, keeping the load
      uphill. Never operate diagonally across an incline.

-   Operators should never reach through the mast of a vehicle to adjust
      the load.

-   Keep forks slightly tilted back so load is cradled by the backrest
      to aid in stabilizing loads when traveling.

-   When traveling the forks must be just high enough to clear the
      floor.

III. Operation of the Vehicle

-   Vehicles will be inspected before being placed in service. Defects
      when found will be immediately reported and corrected.

-   The daily operator’s check-off list must be filled out completely by
      each operator at the start of each shift before the vehicle is put
      into operation.

-   If at any time during your shift a vehicle is found to be in need of
      repair or in any way unsafe, the vehicle will be taken out of
      service until it has been restored to safe operating condition.

-   Spillage of oil or fuel will be carefully washed away or completely
      evaporated and the fuel tank cup replaced before restarting
      engine.

-   Fuel tanks will not be filled while the engine is running, spillage
      will be avoided.

-   No vehicle will be operated with a leak in the fuel system or
      hydraulic system.

-   Open flames will not be used for checking electrolyte level in
      storage batteries or gasoline level in field tanks.

-   Before changing tanks on liquefied propane powered vehicles, the
      tank valve should always be turned off and the engine allowed to
      run until out of gas.

-   Smoking is not allowed when changing storage batteries or placing
      them on charge or taking them off charge for electric powered
      vehicles.

IV. Loading/Stacking

-   Only stable or safely arranged loads will be handled.

-   Only loads within the rated capacity of the vehicle will be handled.

-   The forks must be placed under the load as far as possible. The mast
      will be carefully tilted backward.

-   Extreme care should be used when tilting the load forward or
      backward, especially when the load is raised.

-   When stacking or tiering, the operator should use only enough
      backward tilt to stabilize the load.

-   The operator must be careful not to damage lights, pipes, sprinkler
      systems, overhead doors, vertical beams, walls, etc., when
      stacking material.

-   The uppermost portion of any staked loads will never be closer than
      18 inches under overhead installations, lights, etc.

-   Never tilt the load except where the load is on a deposit position
      over a rack or stack.

-   If material is not banded or correctly piled and the load obviously
      is wobbly, the operator will not attempt to lift it.

-   Never stack material so that it causes blind spots at corners and
      intersections.

-   Only stack material on a stable base that is sufficient in size and
      capable of supporting the stacked weight.

-   The operator should remove unsafe containers and damaged pallets.

Training Requirements

I.  Operator Training

  Operator training will be conducted prior to allowing anyone to
  operate an industrial vehicle, with recertification for experienced
  drivers every three years. Methods will be devised to train operators
  in the safe operation of powered industrial lift trucks. This training
  should include the following:

-   All employees covered by this program will receive proper training,
      including operation and rules for safe driving. A completed
      license will serve as documentation of the training. A copy of
      this license will be maintained on file with the company.

-   All training for drivers will include classroom and practical
      driving testing.

-   Operators certified to drive vehicles should be given a
      certification card to be carried with them whenever operating a
      vehicle.

II. Non-operator Training

  Employees working in areas where powered industrial vehicles operate
  should be made aware of the following general rules:

-   Never pass under the raised forks of a vehicle, whether they are
      loaded or not.

-   Walk around forks of a vehicle, never over or between them.

-   Never “hitch a ride” on someone else’s vehicle.

-   Allow vehicles the right of way.

Attachment K.1.—Forklift Inspection Form

Circle the correct finding for each question.

+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| GENERAL                                       |    |               |
+===============================================+====+===============+
| Do industrial trucks acquired after Feb. 15,  | OK | Action Needed |
| 1972, meet the design requirements in         |    |               |
| American National Standard for Powered        |    |               |
| Industrial Trucks, Part II, ANSI B56.1-1969?  |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Has the manufacturer provided written         | OK | Action Needed |
| approval for modifications that affect the    |    |               |
| capacity and safety operations of the         |    |               |
| equipment?                                    |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Do industrial trucks have labels designating  | OK | Action Needed |
| approval for use in various hazardous or      |    |               |
| non-hazardous locations?                      |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| DESIGNATIONS                                  |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are safety coordinator and procurers of       | OK | Action Needed |
| equipment aware of the 11 designations of     |    |               |
| industrial trucks or tractors (D, DS, DY, E,  |    |               |
| ES, EE, EX, G, GS, LP, and LS)?               |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| DESIGNATED USE OF REQUIREMENTS                |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are safety coordinator and operators          | OK | Action Needed |
| knowledgeable about the use of industrial     |    |               |
| trucks in various locations?                  |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| FUEL HANDLING AND STORAGE REQUIREMENTS        |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is the storage and handling of liquid fuels   | OK | Action Needed |
| in accordance with NFPA Flammable and         |    |               |
| Combustible Liquids Code (NFPA No. 58-1969)?  |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is the storage and handling of liquefied      | OK | Action Needed |
| petroleum gas fuel in accordance with NFPA    |    |               |
| Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum   |    |               |
| Gases (NFPA No. 58-1969)?                     |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| CHANGING AND CHARGING STORAGE BATTERIES       |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are battery-charging installations located in | OK | Action Needed |
| areas designated for that purpose?            |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are facilities provided for flushing and      | OK | Action Needed |
| neutralizing spilled electrolyte?             |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are facilities provided for adequate          | OK | Action Needed |
| ventilation for dispersal of fumes from       |    |               |
| gassing batteries?                            |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is proper handling equipment (conveyor and    | OK | Action Needed |
| hoists) provided for handling batteries?      |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is a carbon filter or siphon provided for     | OK | Action Needed |
| handling electrolyte?                         |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is care taken to ensure that vent caps are    | OK | Action Needed |
| functioning when charging batteries?          |    |               |
|                                               |    |               |
| NOTE: The battery or compartment covers will  |    |               |
| be open to dissipate heat.                    |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is smoking prohibited in the charging area?   | OK | Action Needed |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are precautions taken to prevent open flames, | OK | Action Needed |
| sparks, or electric arcs in battery-charging  |    |               |
| areas?                                        |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are tools and other metallic objects kept     | OK | Action Needed |
| away from the tops of uncovered batteries?    |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| DOCKBOARDS (BRIDGE PLATES)                    |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are portable and powered dockboards strong    | OK | Action Needed |
| enough to carry the load imposed on them?     |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are portable dockboards secured in position,  | OK | Action Needed |
| either by being anchored or equipped with     |    |               |
| devices that will prevent slippage?           |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are handholds or other effective means        | OK | Action Needed |
| provided on portable dockboards to ensure     |    |               |
| safe handling?                                |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is positive protection provided to prevent    | OK | Action Needed |
| railroad cars from being moved while          |    |               |
| dockboards or bridge plates are in position?  |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| OPERATOR TRAINING                             |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are only trained and authorized operators     | OK | Action Needed |
| permitted to operate a powered industrial     |    |               |
| truck?                                        |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| TRUCK OPERATIONS                              |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it prohibited for a person to stand or     | OK | Action Needed |
| pass under the elevated portion of any truck, |    |               |
| whether loaded or empty?                      |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are unauthorized personnel prohibited from    | OK | Action Needed |
| riding on powered industrial trucks?          |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it prohibited for arms or legs to be       | OK | Action Needed |
| placed between the uprights of the mast or    |    |               |
| outside the running lines of a truck?         |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required for load engaging means to be  | OK | Action Needed |
| fully lowered, controls neutralized, power    |    |               |
| shut off, and brakes set when a powered       |    |               |
| industrial truck is left unattended?          |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required to maintain a safe distance    | OK | Action Needed |
| from the edge of ramps or platforms while on  |    |               |
| any elevated dock, platform, or freight car?  |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is an overhead guard used as protection       | OK | Action Needed |
| against falling objects?                      |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is a load backrest extension used whenever    | OK | Action Needed |
| necessary to minimize the possibility of the  |    |               |
| load or part of it from falling backward?     |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are only approved industrial trucks used in   | OK | Action Needed |
| hazardous locations?                          |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| TRAVELING                                     |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that all traffic regulations   | OK | Action Needed |
| be observed, including authorized plant speed |    |               |
| limits?                                       |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required to yield the right of way to   | OK | Action Needed |
| ambulances, fire trucks, or other vehicles in |    |               |
| emergency situations?                         |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that drivers not pass other    | OK | Action Needed |
| trucks traveling in the same direction at     |    |               |
| intersections, blind spots, or other          |    |               |
| dangerous locations?                          |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that drivers slow down and     | OK | Action Needed |
| sound the horn at cross aisles and other      |    |               |
| locations where vision is obstructed?         |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that railroad tracks will be   | OK | Action Needed |
| crossed diagonally wherever possible?         |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that when ascending or         | OK | Action Needed |
| descending grades that exceed 10 percent,     |    |               |
| loaded trucks be driven with the load         |    |               |
| upgrade?                                      |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that on all grades the load    | OK | Action Needed |
| and load engaging means be tilted back, if    |    |               |
| applicable, and raised only as far as         |    |               |
| necessary to clear the road surface?          |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that under all travel          | OK | Action Needed |
| conditions the truck be operated at a speed   |    |               |
| that will permit it to stop in a safe manner? |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are stunt driving and horseplay prohibited?   | OK | Action Needed |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are dockboards or bridge plates properly      | OK | Action Needed |
| secured before they are driven over?          |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that elevators be approached   | OK | Action Needed |
| slowly and then entered squarely after the    |    |               |
| elevator car is properly leveled?             |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that motorized hand trucks     | OK | Action Needed |
| enter elevators or other confined areas with  |    |               |
| the load end forward?                         |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| LOADING                                       |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are drivers instructed that only stable or    | OK | Action Needed |
| safely-arranged loads be handled?             |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are drivers instructed that only loads within | OK | Action Needed |
| the rated capacity of the truck will be       |    |               |
| handled?                                      |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is a load engaging means placed under the     | OK | Action Needed |
| load as far as possible?                      |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are drivers required to use extreme care when | OK | Action Needed |
| tilting the load forward or backward,         |    |               |
| particularly when high tiering?               |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| OPERATION OF THE TRUCK                        |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Are personnel instructed that fuel tanks not  | OK | Action Needed |
| be filled while the engine is running?        |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that spillage of oil or fuel   | OK | Action Needed |
| be carefully washed away or completely        |    |               |
| evaporated and the fuel tank cap replaced     |    |               |
| before restarting the engine?                 |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it prohibited for a truck to be operated   | OK | Action Needed |
| with a leak in the fuel system until the leak |    |               |
| has been corrected?                           |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it prohibited for open flames to be used   | OK | Action Needed |
| for checking electrolyte level in storage     |    |               |
| batteries or gasoline level in fuel tanks?    |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| MAINTENANCE OF INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS              |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that no repairs be made in     | OK | Action Needed |
| Class I, II, and III locations?               |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that repairs to the fuel and   | OK | Action Needed |
| ignition systems of industrial trucks, which  |    |               |
| involve fire hazards, be conducted only in    |    |               |
| locations designated for such repairs?        |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that trucks in need of repairs | OK | Action Needed |
| to the electrical system have the battery     |    |               |
| disconnected before such repairs are made?    |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that industrial trucks not be  | OK | Action Needed |
| altered without the manufacturer’s approval?  |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that industrial trucks be      | OK | Action Needed |
| examined before being placed in service?      |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that water mufflers be filled  | OK | Action Needed |
| daily or as frequently as necessary to        |    |               |
| prevent depletion of the water supply below   |    |               |
| 75 percent of the filled capacity?            |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that vehicles with mufflers    | OK | Action Needed |
| and screens or other parts that may become    |    |               |
| clogged not be operated while such screens or |    |               |
| parts are clogged?                            |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that any vehicle that emits    | OK | Action Needed |
| hazardous sparks or flames from the exhaust   |    |               |
| system be immediately removed from service    |    |               |
| and not returned to service until the cause   |    |               |
| for the emission of such sparks and flames    |    |               |
| has been eliminated?                          |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+
| Is it required that when the temperature of   | OK | Action Needed |
| any part of any truck is found to exceed its  |    |               |
| normal operating temperature, thus creating a |    |               |
| hazardous condition, the vehicle be removed   |    |               |
| from service and not returned to service      |    |               |
| until the cause for such overheating has been |    |               |
| eliminated?                                   |    |               |
+-----------------------------------------------+----+---------------+

APPENDIX L:

SPILL PREVENTION, CONTROL, AND COUNTERMEASURE PLAN

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.120 and 40 CFR 112.1-.7

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  EMERGENCY CONTACT INFORMATION

2.  SPILL PREVENTION

    a.  Hazardous Substance Management

    b.  Employee Training

    c.  Hazardous Substance Inventory

    d.  Spill Response Equipment

    e.  Spill Response, First Aid Equipment, and Fire Alarm Locations

3.  SPILL EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN

    a.  Response Actions (In the Event of a Spill or Release)

    b.  Evacuation Procedures

    c.  Spill Cleanup and Disposal

    d.  Reporting a Release

    e.  Hazardous Substance Inventory

    f.  Facility Map

Emergency Contact Information

+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Onsite Emergency Contacts Primary                       |
|                                                         |
| {Name/Title}                                            |
|                                                         |
| {Business Phone/24-Hour Phone}                          |
|                                                         |
| Secondary                                               |
|                                                         |
| {Name/Title}                                            |
|                                                         |
| {Business Phone/24-Hour Phone}                          |
+=========================================================+
| Emergency Response Contacts Fire/Paramedics/Police: 911 |
|                                                         |
| Fire Non-Emergency Line: {(XXX) XXX-XXXX}               |
|                                                         |
| County Health Department: {(XXX) XXX-XXXX}              |
|                                                         |
| Local Clean Air Agency: {(XXX) XXX-XXXX}                |
|                                                         |
| Department of Ecology: {(XXX) XXX-XXXX}                 |
|                                                         |
| National Response Center: (800) 424-8802                |
|                                                         |
| {Other} {Business phone}                                |
+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Local Emergency Medical Facility {Hospital/Clinic Name} |
|                                                         |
| {Street Address City, State and Zip}                    |
|                                                         |
| Phone: {(XXX) XXX-XXXX}                                 |
|                                                         |
| Fax: {(XXX) XXX-XXXX}                                   |
+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Safety Data Sheets {SDS Location}                       |
+---------------------------------------------------------+

SPILL PREVENTION

Hazardous Substance Management

All hazardous substances, including chemical wastes, are to be managed
in a way that prevents release. The following general requirements are
to be practiced:

I.  Container Management

-   All hazardous substance containers must be in good condition and
      compatible with the materials stored within.

-   All hazardous substance containers must be accessible, and spacing
      between containers must provide sufficient access to perform
      periodic inspections and respond to releases.

-   Empty hazardous substance containers (drums) must have all markers
      and labels removed and the container marked with the word “empty.”

-   Any spills on the exterior of the container must be cleaned
      immediately.

-   Flammable materials stored or dispensed from drums or totes must be
      grounded to prevent static spark.

-   Do not overfill waste drums. 4”of headspace must remain to allow for
      expansion

-   {Add other site-specific practices.}

II. Housekeeping

-   All hazardous substances must be stored inside buildings or under
      cover.

-   Store hazardous substances not used daily in cabinets, or in
      designated areas.

-   All chemicals that are transferred from larger to smaller containers
      must be transferred by use of a funnel or spigot.

-   All hazardous substance containers should be closed while not in
      use.

-   Use drip pans or other collection devices to contain drips or leaks
      from dispensing containers or equipment.

-   Implement preventative maintenance activities to reduce the
      potential for release from equipment.

-   Immediately clean up and properly manage all small spills or leaks.

-   Periodically inspect equipment and hazardous substance storage areas
      to ensure leaks or spills are not occurring.

-   Use signage to identity hazardous substance storage or waste
      collection areas.

-   Keep all work areas and hazardous substance storage areas clean and
      in good general condition.

-   {Add other site-specific practices.}

III. Secondary Containment

-   Store all bulk chemicals (>55 gallons) within appropriate secondary
      containment, or any sized chemical if there is a potential for
      release to the environment.

-   Secondary containment should be checked periodically, and any spills
      identified in secondary containment must be immediately cleaned up
      and removed.

-   {Add other site-specific practices.}

IV. Marking and Labeling

-   Ensure all hazardous substances, including chemical wastes, are
      properly marked and labeled in accordance with all federal, state,
      and local regulations.

-   Ensure that hazardous substances transferred to small containers are
      marked with the chemical’s name (for example, “Isopropyl Alcohol”)
      and hazard (for example, “Flammable”).

-   {Add other site-specific practices.}

Employee Training

All employees must receive periodic training on the proper handling of
hazardous substances, spill prevention practices, and emergency response
procedures. Training must include a review of the spill prevention and
emergency response plan, as well as the location and use of emergency
response equipment. Training can be recorded through safety committee
meetings, staff training logs, or other equivalent record keeping.

Hazardous Substance Inventory

Maintain an inventory for all hazardous substances stored in quantities
less than 55 gallons, and list locations where non-bulk hazardous
substances are stored (for example, flammable lockers – shop floor).

Spill Response Equipment

Spill response equipment must be maintained and located in areas where
spills are likely to occur. Spill kits should provide adequate response
capabilities to manage any anticipated spill or release. The following
general requirements are to be practiced:

-   Stock spill cleanup kits that are compatible with the hazardous
      substances stored on site.

-   Locate spill kits in areas where spills are likely to occur (for
      example, loading docks, chemical storage areas, locations where
      hazardous substance are being transferred, etc.).

-   Spill kits should be sized to manage an anticipated release (spill
      equal to the largest container).

-   Emergency response equipment should be inspected periodically to
      ensure that the spill kit is complete.

Spill Response, First Aid Equipment, and Fire Alarm Locations

  Location(s)    Spill Equipment Content/Inventory
  -------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Loading Dock   40gl – Spill kit including 65-gl over pack drum, universal adsorbent socks, pillows and pads, personal protective equipment, non-sparking shovel, disposable bags and ties, and Emergency Response Guidebook
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 
                 

SPILL EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN

The Spill Emergency Response Plan is a facility-specific plan for
dealing with emergencies and shall be implemented immediately whenever
there is a fire, explosion, or release of a hazardous substance that
threatens human health or the environment. The emergency response plan
shall be reviewed and immediately amended whenever the following occur:

-   The plan fails in an emergency.

-   The facility changes in its design, construction, operation,
    maintenance, or other circumstances in a way that increases the
    potential for fire, explosions, or release of a hazardous substance.

-   The list of emergency contacts changes.

-   The list of emergency equipment changes.

Response Actions (In the Event of a Spill or Release)

In the event of a hazardous substance spill or release, immediately take
the following measures to keep the spill from entering sewer or storm
drains, spreading off-site, or affecting human health. In all cases,
caution and common sense must be maintained with the primary goal being
to prevent and limit personal injury.

Stop, contain, and clean up the chemical spill if the following are
true:

-   The spilled chemical and its hazardous properties have been
      identified.

-   The spill is small and easily contained.

-   Responder is aware of the chemicals’ hazardous properties.

  If a spill or release cannot be controlled or injuries have occurred
  due to the release, the following procedures should be implemented:

-   Summon help or alert others of the release.

-   Evacuate immediate area, and provide care to the injured—call 911.

-   If potential fire or explosion hazards exist, initiate evacuation
      procedures—call 911.

-   Respond defensively to any uncontrolled spills:

    -   Use appropriate personal protective equipment when responding to
        any spill.

    -   Attempt to shut off the source of the release (if safe to do
        so).

    -   Eliminate sources of ignition (if safe to do so).

    -   Protect drains by use of adsorbent booms or drain covers (if
        safe to do so).

-   Notify onsite emergency contacts.

-   Notify other trained staff or {emergency response contractor} to
      assist with the spill response and cleanup activities.

-   Coordinate response activities with local emergency personnel (fire
      department).

-   Be prepared to provide SDS information to fire department, EMT,
      hospital, or physician.

-   Notify appropriate agency if a release has entered the environment.
      Refer to Notification and Reporting section for reporting
      thresholds.

Evacuation Procedures

In the event of a hazardous substance release that has the potential for
fire, explosion, or other human health hazards, the following procedures
will be implemented:

-   Facility staff will be notified of evacuation by one or more of the
      following methods: verbal, intercom, portable radio, alarm, and
      other effective means.

-   Notification to emergency services will be performed—call 911.

-   Facility staff will follow predetermined evacuation routes and
      assemble at designated areas. Evacuation maps must be displayed
      throughout the facility.

-   Individuals responsible for coordinating evacuations must confirm if
      the business has been completely evacuated.

-   Facility staff will be made familiar with evacuation procedures
      during new employee orientation and annual trainings thereafter.

-   Designated emergency response contacts will coordinate all
      activities with outside emergency personnel.

Spill Cleanup and Disposal

In the event of a hazardous substance release, spill cleanup materials
are to be properly characterized to determine if it designates as a
Dangerous Waste. The designated onsite emergency contact, with the
assistance of the {waste disposal vendor} and other resources, will
determine the wastes status prior to disposal.

Reporting a Release

If a hazardous substance spill has been released to soil, surface water,
drains, or air, the following entities must be notified within 24 hours
(may vary from state to state):

-   Fire Department (any release that poses an immediate threat to human
      health, property, or the environment)

-   County Health Department

-   Water/Wastewater Management

-   Clean Air Agency

-   National Response Center (release of oil or fuel to surface water,
      or a release of a chemical with an established Reportable
      Quantity-RQ)

  When reporting a release, prepare to provide the following information
  (use spill report form):

-   Your name and the telephone number from which you are calling

-   Exact address of the release or threatened release

-   Date, time, cause, and type of incident (fire, air release, spill,
      etc.)

-   Material and quantity of the release, to the extent known

-   Current condition of the facility

-   Extent of injuries, if any

-   Possible hazards to the public health or environment outside of the
      facility

Hazardous Substance Inventory

Those materials manufactured, stored, used, or generated as a chemical
waste in quantities greater than 55 gallons.

  Hazardous Substance   Manufacturer   Quantity / Unit of Issue   Location
  --------------------- -------------- -------------------------- ----------------
  pMDI                                 20–55 gallon drums         Main warehouse
  pMDI                                 3–55 gallon drums          Rig #1
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  

Facility Map

Include emergency exits routes, fire alarms, fire extinguishers, spill
response equipment, and first aid stations (eye wash, first aid kits,
etc.).

APPENDIX M:

ASBESTOS AND LEAD AWARENESS PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.1025 and 29 CFR 1926.62

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  TRAINING

2.  ASBETOS

    a.  Asbestos Exposure Symptoms

    b.  How Asbestos Exposure Occurs

    c.  Protection Methods

3.  LEAD

    a.  Lead Exposure Symptoms

    b.  How Lead Exposure Occurs

    c.  Protection Methods

TRAINING

Asbestos and Lead awareness training is required for all associates who
may be exposed to the hazard, and their training must be documented.

All [Company Name] employees shall be aware that they must be cognizant
of the work being conducted around them on multiple contractor sites,
and they shall keep in place protections at all times.

BACKGROUND 

ASBESTOS

Asbestos is a mineral-based material that is resistant to heat and
corrosive chemicals. Asbestos is found in building materials such as
shingles, floor tiles, cement pipes, roofing felts, insulation, ceiling
tiles, fire-resistant drywall, and acoustical products. Today,
fortunately, very few asbestos-containing products are being produced
and installed. So, most worker exposures occur during removal of
asbestos or renovation of structures containing asbestos.

Asbestos Exposure Symptoms

If you are not properly protected, your chances of exposing yourself to
asbestos are high. OSHA requires training to protect you. Let us look at
the effects of asbestos exposure.

+--------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Exposure     | Effects                                              |
+==============+======================================================+
| Acute        | Shortness of breath, chest or abdominal pain, or     |
|              | irritation of the skin and mucous membranes          |
| (short term) |                                                      |
+--------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Chronic      | Breathing difficulty, dry cough, broadening and      |
|              | thickening of the ends of the fingers, bluish        |
| (long term)  | discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes,      |
|              | asbestosis (an emphysema-like condition), and lung   |
|              | cancer or mesothelioma (a cancerous tumor that       |
|              | spreads rapidly in the cells of the membranes        |
|              | covering the lungs and body organs)                  |
+--------------+------------------------------------------------------+

How Asbestos Exposure Occurs

[]Asbestos fibers enter the body by inhalation or ingestion of airborne
particles that become embedded in the tissue of the respiratory or
digestive systems. Should exposure occur, asbestos symptoms may not
surface for 20 or more years. Smoking around this substance greatly
increases your risk of exposure and potential for developing lung
cancer. (An attic insulated with loose fill asbestos is pictured at
left. Exposure will occur when the insulation is removed and replaced
with a different insulation product)

Exposure must be limited to 0.1 fibers per cubic centimeter of air (0.1
f/cc), averaged over an 8-hour work shift. The excursion or short-term
limit is one fiber per cubic centimeter of air (1 f/cc) averaged over a
sampling period of 30 minutes. This means that if you had a pinch of
asbestos between your thumb and forefinger and threw it into the air,
you would meet the exposure limit.

[]Protection Methods

I.  Personal protective equipment

  Employees must wear NIOSH-approved respirators and protective clothing
  (i.e., full body suits, gloves, and footwear).

  Pictured at right is the removal of asbestos ceiling tiles.

II. Work practices

  One good work practice is to place and store contaminated clothing in
  closed containers that prevent the dispersion of the asbestos outside
  the container.

III. []Signs

  An asbestos warning sign will state the following:

-   Danger

-   Asbestos

-   Cancer and Lung Disease Hazard

-   Authorized Personnel Only

-   Respirators and Protective Clothing are Required in this Area

  A sample sign is pictured at right.

LEAD

Lead is a chemical element used in batteries, piping, solder, radiation
shields, and other industrial materials. Until 1978, it was an additive
to certain types of paints. Today, fortunately, very few lead-containing
products are being produced and installed. Most worker exposures occur
during removal of lead-based paint and plumbing or renovation of
structures containing lead.

Lead Exposure Symptoms

If you are not properly protected, your chances of exposing yourself can
be high. OSHA requires training to protect you. Let us look at the
effects of lead exposure.

-   Constipation or diarrhea

-   Lack of appetite

-   Weight loss

-   Nausea

-   Abdominal pain

-   Adverse effects in the male and female reproductive systems

-   Adverse effects in an unborn fetus

+--------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Exposure     | Effects                                              |
+==============+======================================================+
| Acute        | Lead is a systemic poison that serves no known       |
|              | useful function once absorbed by the body. Exposure  |
| (short term) | to lead in large enough quantities can kill in a     |
|              | matter of days. A condition affecting the brain,     |
|              | known as acute encephalopathy, may arise that        |
|              | develops into seizures, coma, and death. A           |
|              | short-term exposure of this magnitude is highly      |
|              | unlikely but not impossible. There is no sharp       |
|              | dividing line between developing acute and chronic   |
|              | health effects. Lead adversely affects numerous body |
|              | systems and causes forms of health impairment and    |
|              | disease that arise after periods of exposure as      |
|              | short as days or as long as several years.           |
+--------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Chronic      | Chronic overexposure to lead may result in severe    |
|              | damage to your blood-forming (renal), nervous,       |
| (long term)  | urinary, and reproductive systems. Some common       |
|              | symptoms of chronic overexposure include loss of     |
|              | appetite, metallic taste in the mouth, anxiety,      |
|              | constipation, nausea, excessive tiredness, weakness, |
|              | insomnia, headache, nervous irritability, muscle and |
|              | joint pain or soreness, fine tremors, numbness,      |
|              | dizziness, and hyperactivity. At this stage, a       |
|              | qualified physician may diagnose lead poisoning      |
+--------------+------------------------------------------------------+

How Lead Exposure Occurs

Lead-based particles from operations, including sanding, sandblasting
and other demolition processes, can enter the respiratory system.
Non-occupational exposure to lead is may be at concentrations less than
that of industrial workplace exposure. Industrial lead exposure can
occur at operations such as stacking, pasting, casting, burning and
smelting, and oxide manufacturing and assembly. There may be a potential
health hazard at manufacturing facilities where lead is a part of
operations.

When lead is absorbed into the body in certain doses, it is a toxic
substance. Lead is not absorbed through the skin but can enter the body
by inhalation and ingestion. When lead is scattered through the air as a
dust, fume, or mist, it can be inhaled and absorbed by the lungs and
upper respiratory tract.

Inhalation of airborne lead is generally the most important source of
occupational lead absorption. Lead can also be absorbed through the
digestive system if swallowed. Handling food and cigarettes, chewing
tobacco, or putting on make-up with hands contaminated with lead will
contribute to ingestion. It is for these reasons that eating, drinking,
and smoking in identified lead areas must be avoided.

Lead blood levels will continue to increase if exposure is not
controlled. A significant portion of the lead that you inhale or ingest
gets into the blood stream. Once in your blood stream, lead is
circulated throughout your body and stored in various organs and body
tissue. Some of the lead is filtered out of the body by excretion, but
some remains in the blood and other tissues. The amount of lead stored
in the body will increase if lead absorption is more than body
excretion. The lead stored in the body can slowly cause irreversible
damage to cells, organs, and the body system.

Protection Methods

Proper control of exposure to lead is the responsibility of both the
employer and the employee. All of the control methods discussed below
are essential to minimize additional sources of lead absorption from
inhalation or ingestion of lead that may accumulate on you, your
clothing, or your possessions. High personal standards of cleanliness
are necessary. Strict compliance with these provisions can virtually
eliminate several sources of lead exposure that significantly contribute
to excessive lead absorption.

I.  Respiratory Protection

  Exposure to hazardous materials requires special precautions against
  absorption of toxic compounds. While engineering controls (e.g.,
  ventilation systems) are the primary means of controlling materials
  such as lead dust, fumes, vapors, and mists, it is often necessary to
  rely on respiratory protection. The respirator will give you the
  proper amount of protection based on the nature of the hazard. Only
  use respirators tested and certified by the National Institute for
  Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). The cartridges that come with
  the mask are approved for the environment in which you will be
  working. Never use a cartridge respirator in an atmosphere containing
  less than 19.5% oxygen or an atmosphere immediately dangerous to life
  and health (IDLH). In addition, observe the requirements of the
  Respiratory Protection Program. In extreme cases a NIOSH-certified air
  purifying respirator may be required.

II. Protective Work Clothing and Equipment

  Protective clothing and equipment must be worn when the exposure to
  lead and lead compounds is above the PEL. If work clothing is
  provided, it will be given to you in a clean and dry condition at
  least weekly, and daily if your airborne exposure to lead is greater
  than 200 ug/m3. Protective work clothing and equipment can include
  coveralls, Tyvek™ coveralls, gloves, hats, shoes, shoe coverlets, face
  shield or vented goggles.

  All clothing and equipment will be repaired, replaced, cleaned,
  laundered, or disposed of as necessary by the company. Contaminated
  work clothing and equipment must be removed from the designated change
  room and placed in the provided closed containers to be cleaned or
  disposed of. At no time may lead be removed from protective clothing
  or equipment by any means that disperses lead into the workplace.

III. Signs

  A lead warning sign will state the following:

-   Danger

-   Lead

-   Hazard

-   Authorized Personnel Only

-   Respirators and Protective Clothing are Required in this Area

  A sample sign is pictured at right.

APPENDIX N:

BLOOD-BORNE PATHOGENS PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.1030 and 29 CFR 1926.50

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  PURPOSE

2.  REGULATORY SCOPE

3.  TRAINING

4.  GENERAL AWARENESS TRAINING

5.  EXPOSURE CONTROLS

6.  EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN (ECP)

7.  METHODS OF COMPLIANCE (UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS, WORK PRACTICES, ETC.)

8.  UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS

9.  POST-EXPOSURE EVALUATION AND FOLLOW-UP

10. COMMUNICATION OF HAZARDS TO EMPLOYEES

11. RECORD KEEPING

    a.  Medical Records

    b.  Confidentiality

    c.  Training Records

    d.  Availability

PURPOSE

[Company Name] has developed this Blood-Borne Pathogens Program to
protect the Employees from occupational exposures to blood and other
potentially infectious materials.

REGULATORY SCOPE

This procedure addresses the regulatory requirements under 29 CFR
1926.50 and 1910.1030. Where medical facilities are not reasonably
accessible, 29 CFR 1926.50 requires employers to have onsite a person
with a valid First Aid/CPR certification. Requirements of the
Blood-Borne Pathogens Program are applicable under these circumstances.

TRAINING

Employees who may be occupationally exposed to blood-borne pathogens
will be provided training. [Company Name] training will be provided
prior to initial assignment where potential occupational exposure may
take place and at least annually thereafter.

The training program will contain the following:

-   Method to obtain a copy of this policy

-   Epidemiology and symptoms of blood-borne diseases

-   Modes of transmission of blood-borne pathogens

-   Appropriate methods for recognizing tasks and other activities that
    may involve exposure to blood and other potentially infectious
    materials

-   Use and limitations of methods that will prevent or reduce exposure
    including appropriate engineering controls, work practices, and
    personal protective equipment

-   Information on the types, proper uses, location, removal, handling,
    decontamination and disposal of personal protective equipment

-   Basis for selection of personal protective equipment

-   Appropriate actions to take and persons to contact in an emergency
    involving blood or other potentially infectious materials

-   Procedure to follow if an exposure incident occurs, including the
    method of reporting the incident and the medical follow-up that will
    be made available

-   Post-exposure evaluation and follow-up provided by the designated
    medical professional contracted by [Company Name]

-   Signs and labels used to identify biological hazards

-   Opportunity for questions and answers session

The trainer will be knowledgeable in the subject matter covered by the
elements contained in the training program as it relates to the
workplace that the training will address.

GENERAL AWARENESS TRAINING 

[Company Name] will provide general awareness training to all Employees.
This training will include the following:

-   The potential hazards associated with blood, bodily fluids, and
    other potentially infectious materials

-   The modes of transmission (how the employee can become infected)

-   Appropriate actions to take and persons to contact in an emergency
    involving blood or other potentially infectious materials

-   The importance of not coming in contact with blood, bodily fluids,
    or other infectious materials

-   The importance of letting medically trained individuals respond and
    handle emergent medical accidents

-   The importance of employees not trained to handle medical
    emergencies or first aid avoiding any situation where there is
    possible exposure to blood-borne pathogens

EXPOSURE CONTROLS 

Only those employees trained and designated by the company to provide
First Aid/CPR are considered to have the potential for occupational
exposure to blood-borne pathogens. Under our current operating
procedures, [Company Name] employees are not trained for, and do not
provide, first aid services (with the exception of self-administered
treatments such as Band-Aids or ointments). We rely on third party
professionals for all medical services.

EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN (ECP)

[Company Name] shall establish a written Exposure Control Plan (ECP) if
employing individuals with potential occupational exposure to infectious
waste (i.e., those supplying First Aid/CPR). The ECP shall be made
accessible to all employees. At a minimum, the ECP shall include the
following:

-   A list of all job classifications in which there is the potential
    for exposure

-   A schedule and method of implementation (how the company plans to
    comply)

-   Procedure for the evaluation of circumstances surrounding exposure
    incidents

[Company Name] will review and update the ECP at least annually or
whenever there is a change or modification to an employee’s assignment
or a new procedure that will affect (increase or decrease) the
employee’s occupational exposure.

METHODS OF COMPLIANCE (Universal Precautions, Work Practices, etc.)

[Company Name] will use engineering controls as the primary means for
controlling occupational exposures associated with blood, bodily fluids,
and other potentially infectious materials.

The company’s approach in engineering controls is to use, to the fullest
extent feasible, intrinsically safe substances, procedures, or devices
(e.g., CPR masks, biohazard cleanup kits, and sanitizing solutions).

UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS

-   All employees whose jobs put them at risk of direct skin contact
    with blood, other potentially infectious material, mucous membranes,
    non-intact skin, or when handling items or surfaces soiled with
    blood or other potentially infectious materials shall wear latex
    gloves.

-   Disposable, single-use gloves, such as intact surgical latex gloves,
    will be replaced when visibly soiled, torn, punctured, or when their
    ability to function as a barrier is compromised. Gloves will not be
    washed or disinfected for reuse.

-   CPR masks with backflow prevention devices will be used.

-   Masks that protect the nose and mouth area and eye protection or
    chin-length face shields will be worn whenever splashes, spray,
    spatter, droplets, or aerosols of blood or other potentially
    infectious materials may be generated and there is a potential eye,
    nose, or mouth contamination. Masks are not required for routine
    care (e.g., a nose bleed type incident). However, protective intact
    latex gloves will always be used when blood is present.

-   Gowns, lab coats, aprons, or similar clothing will be worn if there
    is a potential for soiling clothes with blood or other infectious
    materials.

-   Hand washing will be conducted immediately after direct hand contact
    with blood or other infectious materials and after the removal of
    gloves and other PPE.

-   All personal protective equipment will be removed immediately upon
    leaving the work area and placed in the appropriate container for
    disposal or storage.

-   Eating, drinking, smoking, applying cosmetics, and handling contact
    lenses is prohibited in work areas where there is potential for
    occupational exposure.

-   Work surfaces will be cleaned with an appropriate disinfectant when
    surfaces are contaminated by any spill of blood or other potentially
    infectious material.

-   Contaminated surfaces will be cleaned with a disinfectant such as
    household bleach, freshly diluted with one part bleach to 10 parts
    water. Gloves will be worn when disinfecting.

-   At no time will an employee handle any type of potentially
    contaminated equipment unless gloves are worn.

-   Reusable items that have been contaminated will not be opened,
    emptied, or cleaned manually or in any other manner that would cause
    exposure to the employee.

POST-EXPOSURE EVALUATION AND FOLLOW-UP

Following the report of an exposure incident, [Company Name] will make
available to the exposed employee a confidential medical evaluation and
follow-up including the following:

-   The documented route of exposure

-   The circumstances under which the exposure occurred

-   The identification and documentation of the individual who is the
    source of exposure, unless prohibited by law

-   The testing for infection of both the source individual and the
    exposed employee as soon as possible (permission must be given from
    the possible source prior to testing)

-   The provision of counseling, if necessary, and an evaluation of
    reported illness to an exposed employee as soon as it is available

COMMUNICATION OF HAZARDS TO EMPLOYEES

[Company Name] will ensure that all employees are familiar with the
blood-borne pathogen sign and labels indicating a hazard.

Labels shall be affixed to any of the following:

-   Containers of regulated waste

-   Refrigerators and freezers containing blood or other potentially
    infectious material (i.e., human body fluids)

-   Other containers used to ship blood or other potentially infectious
    materials.

Employees of [Company Name] shall contact the [Health and Safety Officer
Title] at the Main Office whenever potentially infectious materials must
be labeled or disposed.

RECORD KEEPING

Medical Records

[Company Name] will establish and maintain medical records on all
employees with occupational exposures.

The record will include the following:

-   The name and social security number of the employee

-   A copy of all results of examinations, medical testing, and
      follow-up procedures

-   The company's copy of the healthcare professional's written opinion

-   A copy of the information provided to the healthcare professional

Confidentiality

[Company Name] will ensure that employee medical records are kept
confidential and the contents not disclosed (to any person within or
outside the workplace) without the employee's express written consent.
These records will be maintained by [Company Name] for the duration of
employment plus 30 years.

Training Records

Training records will be kept for three (3) years and will include the
following:

-   Dates of the training sessions

-   Contents or summary of the training

-   Names and qualifications of trainers

-   Names and job titles of all trainees

Availability

All records required to be maintained will be available for examination
and copying upon request of the employee or the employee’s
representative.

APPENDIX O:

ASSURED EQUIPMENT GROUNDING PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. 29 CFR 1910.404

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  WRITTEN PROGRAM

2.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

3.  POWER TOOL AND ACCESSORIES SELECTION, EVALUATION, AND CONDITION

4.  POWER TOOL PRECAUTIONS

5.  METHODS OF GUARDING

6.  INITIAL TRAINING

7.  REFRESHER TRAINING

WRITTEN PROGRAM

[Company Name] will review and evaluate this standard practice
instruction on an annual basis, or when changes occur to 29 CFR 1926.404
that prompt revision of this document, or when facility operational
changes occur that require a revision of this document. Effective
implementation requires a written program for job safety and health that
is endorsed and advocated by the highest level of management within this
company and that outlines our goals and plans. This written program will
be communicated to all required personnel. It is designed to establish
clear goals and objectives.

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

[Company Name] shall be responsible for the safe condition of electrical
tools and equipment used by its employees, including tools and equipment
that may be furnished by employees. [Company Name] will develop assured
grounding operational procedures through the use of this document. After
tool and equipment selection and evaluation, equipment will be used and
maintained in a safe condition.

Supervisors will ensure that equipment utilized at each job site is
maintained in a safe condition.

RESPONSIBILITY: The [Company Name] [Health and Safety Officer Title] is
[Health and Safety Officer Name], the. The [Health and Safety Officer
Title] is solely responsible for all facets of this program and has full
authority to make necessary decisions to ensure success of the program.
The [Health and Safety Officer Title] is the sole person authorized to
amend these instructions and is authorized to halt any operation of the
company where there is danger of serious personal injury.

POWER TOOL AND ACCESSORIES SELECTION, EVALUATION, AND CONDITION 

The greatest hazards posed by power tools usually results from misuse
and improper maintenance. Tool selection sometimes is not considered a
priority when arrangements are made to begin work. All employees will
consider the following when selecting tools:

-   Is the tool correct for the type work to be performed?

-   Are grounding methods sufficient when working in wet conditions?

-   Is the grounding terminal present on the plug?

-   Is the polarity of connections correct? No grounded conductor can be
    attached to any terminal or lead that results in a reversed
    designated polarity.

-   Are grounding terminals or grounding-type devices on receptacles,
    cord connectors, or attachment plugs used for the intended purpose?

-   Are grounding terminals or grounding-type devices on receptacles,
    cord connectors, or attachment plugs defeated in any way?

-   Are all receptacles and attachment caps or plugs tested for correct
    attachment of the equipment grounding conductor? The equipment
    grounding conductor must be connected to its proper terminal.

-   Are grounding terminals or grounding-type devices on receptacles,
    cord connectors, or attachment plugs defeated in any way?

-   Are all 120 volt, single-phase15 and 20 ampere receptacle outlets on
    construction sites, which are not part of the permanent wiring of
    the building or structure, equipped with approved ground-fault
    circuit interrupters for personnel protection?

-   Are conductors used as grounded conductors identifiable and
    distinguishable from all other conductors?

-   Is each cord set, attachment cap, plug and receptacle of cord sets,
    and any equipment connected by cord and plug visually inspected
    daily before use for external defects, such as deformed or missing
    pins or insulation damage, and for indications of possible internal
    damage? (Exception: cord sets and receptacles that are fixed and not
    exposed to damage)

-   Is the equipment found damaged or defective removed from service
    until repaired or replaced?

-   Are guards installed properly and in good condition?

-   Are all required tests performed for the following?

    -   Before first use

    -   Before equipment is returned to service following repairs

    -   Before equipment is used after any incident that can be
        reasonably suspected to have caused damage (for example, when a
        cord set is run over)

    -   At intervals not to exceed three months, except that cord sets
        and receptacles that are fixed and not exposed to damage must be
        tested at intervals not to exceed six months

-   Are all required tests documented, maintained, and inclusive of the
    following:

    -   Have all equipment that have passed the test been identified?

    -   Has the last date tested or the testing interval been accounted
        for?

    -   Is the test documentation maintained until replaced by a more
        current record?

-   Does the tool create sparks or heat? Has this been considered when
    working around flammable substances?

-   Are cutting tools sharp? Dull tools are more hazardous than sharp
    ones.

-   Is the tool used on the proper working surface? Tools used on dirty
    or wet working surfaces can create a multitude of hazards.

-   Are tools stored properly when not being used? Saw blades and other
    sharp tools should be stored so that sharp edges are directed away
    from aisles and coworkers.

POWER TOOL PRECAUTIONS 

Power tools can be hazardous when improperly used. This company uses
several types. The following precautions will be taken by employees of
this company to prevent injury:

-   Power tools will always be operated within their design limitations.

-   Eye protection, gloves, and safety footwear are recommended during
    operation.

-   Tools will be stored in an appropriate dry location when not in use.

-   Tool work will only be conducted in well illuminated locations.

-   Tools will not be carried by the cord or hose.

-   Cords or hoses will not be yanked to disconnect them from the
    receptacle.

-   Cords and hoses will be kept away from heat, oils, and sharp edges
    or any other source that could result in damage.

-   Tools will be disconnected when not in use, before servicing, and
    when changing accessories such as blades, bits, and cutters.

-   Observers will be kept at a safe distance at all times from the work
    area.

-   Work will be secured with clamps or a vice where possible to free
    both hands to operate tools.

-   To prevent accidental starting, employees should be continually
    aware not to hold the start button while carrying a plugged-in tool.

-   Tools will be maintained in a clean manner and in accordance with
    the manufacturer’s guidelines.

-   Ensure that proper shoes are worn and that the work area is kept
    clean to maintain proper footing and good balance.

-   Ensure that proper apparel is worn. Loose clothing, ties, or jewelry
    can become caught in moving parts.

-   Tools that are damaged will be removed from service immediately and
    tagged "Do Not Use.” They will be reported and turned over to the
    {location or individual} for repair or replacement.

-   Cracked saws: All cracked saws will be removed from service.

METHODS OF GUARDING

One or more methods of guarding shall be provided where required to
protect the operator and other employees in the area from hazards such
as those created by point of operation, in running nip points, rotating
parts, flying chips, and sparks. Examples of guarding methods are
barrier guards, two-hand tripping devices, electronic safety devices,
etc. The guard shall be such that it does not offer an accident hazard
in itself. Employees will perform the following:

-   Inspect tools without guards for signs of guard removal. If it is
    evident that a guard is required, tag-out the tool and obtain a
    replacement. Tools will not be energized during inspection.

-   Inspect tools having guards for proper operation and maintenance
    prior to use. Tools will not be energized during inspection.

-   Never remove a guard during use.

INITIAL TRAINING

Training shall be conducted prior to job assignment. [Company Name]
shall provide training to ensure that the grounding requirements,
purposes, functions, and proper uses of tools to be used in the normal
function of their jobs are understood by employees and that the
knowledge and skills required for the safe application and usage is
acquired by employees. This standard practice instruction shall be
provided to and read by all employees receiving training. The training
shall include, at a minimum, the following:

-   Grounding requirements for tools and associated site electrical
    equipment.

-   Types of tools appropriate for use.

-   Recognition of applicable electrical hazards associated with work to
    be completed.

-   Tool selection requirements.

-   Procedures for removal of an electrical tool or accessory from
    service.

-   All other employees whose work operations are or may be in an area
    where tools that could present a hazard to other than the user will
    be made aware of the hazards.

-   Tools identification: Tools having identification numbers will be
    checked for legibility.

-   Certification: [Company Name] shall certify that employee training
    has been accomplished and is being kept up to date. The
    certification shall contain each employee's name and dates of
    training.

-   Tool trainers: The following employees or position titles will
    receive training and, as required, serve as tool trainers.
    Company-qualified, assured grounding program trainers will consist
    of the following:

    -   Title Member

    -   Trainer Safety Officer

    -   Trainer First Line Supervisors

    -   Trainer

    -   Trainer

REFRESHER TRAINING

This standard practice instruction shall be provided to and read by all
employees receiving refresher training. The training content shall be
identical to initial training. Refresher training will be conducted on
an as-required basis or when the following conditions are met, which
ever event occurs sooner:

-   Retraining shall be provided for all authorized and affected
    employees whenever (and prior to) there being a change in their job
    assignments, a change in the type of tools used, or when a known
    hazard is added to the work environment.

-   Additional retraining shall also be conducted whenever a periodic
    inspection reveals, or whenever [Company Name] has reason to
    believe, that there are deviations from or inadequacies in the
    employee's knowledge or use of tools.

-   The retraining shall reestablish employee proficiency and introduce
    new or revised methods and procedures, as necessary.

-   Certification: [Company Name] shall certify that employee training
    has been accomplished and is being kept up to date. The
    certification shall contain each employee's name and dates of
    training.

APPENDIX P:

SILICA EXPOSURE CONTROL PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

29 CFR 1910.1053 and 1926.1153

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

Objective

The purpose of this plan is to comply with provisions set forth in the
Occupational Safety & Health Administration’s (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1053
and 1926.1153, Respirable Crystalline Silica, to limit employee exposure
to airborne respirable crystalline silica (RCS). Chronic exposure to
dust containing crystalline silica has been shown to result in
Silicosis, an irreversible illness of the lungs. Additionally,
crystalline silica has been classified as a human lung carcinogen.

[Company Name] implements exposure controls which protect employees from
exposure to airborne RCS. While implementing control measures to further
reduce occupational exposure to silica, employees may be enrolled in
this Silica Exposure Control Plan.

Scope

This Silica Exposure Control Plan (SECP) covers [Company Name] employees
whose job duties potentially expose them to hazardous levels of
respirable crystalline silica. This program takes appropriate measures
to comply with the permissible exposure limit (PEL) and action level
(AL) included in OSHA Standards 29 CFR 1910.1053 and 1926.1153. Elements
of this program include engineering and administrative exposure
controls, use of respiratory protection, exposure monitoring, medical
surveillance, training, recordkeeping, and program evaluation.

REGULATIONS AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS

Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA)

This Silica Exposure Control Plan complies with the following OSHA
standards:

• 29 CFR 1910.1053 and 1926.1153, Respirable Crystalline Silica

• 29 CFR 1910.134 and 1926.xxx, Respiratory Protection Standard

• 29 CFR 1910.1200 and 1926.xxx, Hazard Communication

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

This Silica Exposure Control Plan for [Company Name] employees is a
cooperative effort between the [Company Name]healthcare providers,
supervisors, and employees. Specific responsibilities relating to this
Silica Exposure Control Plan are outlined below.

[Company Name] Occupational Health & Safety

i.  Develop, administer, and review this Silica ECP

ii. Conduct RCS hazard and exposure assessments

iii. Determine appropriate control measures, in accordance with this ECP

iv. Enroll employees into the [Company Name]Respiratory Protection
    Program if they conduct activities that could result in exposure to
    RCS

v.  Train personnel on this Silica ECP

vi. Coordinate x-ray services for employees as part of medical
    surveillance requirements

vii. Maintain training records Conduct program evaluations

Supervisors

i.  Comply with the control methods listed in this SECP

ii. Provide employees with respiratory protection equipment when
    engineering controls are not compliant with OSHA silica exposure
    control methods (see Appendix C.1)

iii. Ensure that employees properly use respiratory protection equipment
     and comply with requirements in the [Company Name]Respiratory
     Protection Program.

iv. Contact [Health and Safety Officer Title] if they are unsure of
    which control method should be used when working with airborne RCS

v.  Assist in coordinating employee x-rays at least every three years if
    medical surveillance requirements of this SECP apply

Employees

Employees that have attended Silica Training provided by [Company Name],
shall be deemed Competent Persons. Only Competent Persons shall be
allowed to participate in activities that potentially produce airborne
RCS. Their responsibilities are as follows:

i.  Review and comply with requirements in the SECP

ii. Attend required Silica Training prior to working on silica-based
    activities

iii. Participate in the [Company Name] Respiratory Protection Program

iv. Report concerns to their supervisor and/or FM-OHS

v.  Report equipment, tool, and PPE malfunctions to their supervisor

vi. Use equipment, tools, and PPE in a manner that complies with
    instruction and training

vii. Provide feedback for annual program evaluation as requested by
     [Company Name]

viii. Attend initial and periodic medical examination if medical
      surveillance requirements of this ECP apply

Airborne Respirable Crystalline Silica-Associated Activities (ARCS)

Work conducted by [Company Name] that potentially exposes employees to
ARCS has been identified as, but not limited to:

1.  Drilling concrete, masonry block, or gypsum board

2.  Using core-drilling machines to create access and pathways for
    utility lines

3.  Using handheld, stationary, or walk-behind saws for the cutting of
    asphalt, concrete, masonry block, gypsum board, and other material
    containing any silica or quartz product that could generate airborne
    respirable crystalline silica particles

4.  Mixing, setting, and finishing of any concrete mixture containing
    respirable crystalline silica material

5.  Installation, preparation, finishing, and demolition operations
    where sheetrock is found including tapping, mudding, and texturizing
    work is performed

6.  Using jack-hammers or other impact tools used for chipping or
    demolition of concrete or other masonry material

7.  All clean-up and housekeeping activities used in conjunction or as a
    result of the above activities listed above

6. Exposure Control Methods

a.  For each employee working with materials containing crystalline
    silica and engaged in a task that has the potential to produce
    airborne RCS, supervisors and employees shall properly implement the
    engineering controls, work practices, and respiratory protection
    specified.

b.  Appendix C.1, “Silica Control Methods and PPE Requirements,” shall
    be referenced to determine acceptable equipment use and respirator
    requirements. If equipment use does not comply with the standards in
    Appendix C.1, respiratory protection is mandatory until objective
    data can be obtained by [Company Name] to confirm acceptable levels
    of RCS.

7. Engineering Controls

Wet Method Controls

Wet method control involves using equipment and tools in conjunction
with a water delivery system, either integrated into the equipment
manufacturer’s design, or by other means of providing a constant source
of water at the point of contact with the material surface. Water must
be sufficient to minimize the release of visible dust.

Dust Collection System Controls

Dust collection system controls involve using equipment and tools
equipped with a dust collector, either integrated into the equipment
manufacturer’s design, or by other means of providing dust filtration
with 99% or greater efficiency. Dust collectors’ air flow and filtering
efficiency must be sufficient to minimize the release of visible dust.

Ineffective Engineering Controls

Equipment that ineffectively reduces the generation of airborne RCS
shall be inspected and repaired or replaced as needed. Work shall not
continue until the required engineering controls are functioning
properly.

8. PPE

Employees that use respiratory protection must be enrolled in, and
comply with, the [Company Name] Respiratory Protection Program.
Requirements of this program include, but are not limited to:

1.  Medical clearance to wear respiratory protection

2.  Fit-testing at least annually

3.  Being clean-shaven (except if using a loose-fitting powered
    air-purifying respirator)

4.  Use of respirators that are fit-tested and issued by FM

The use of N-95 filtering facepieces is for voluntary use only, and may
not be used for protection against airborne RCS.

 Housekeeping

For activities that potentially generate RCS, the clean-up of any dust
generated is mandatory. Employees shall not dry sweep or dry brush where
such activity could contribute to employee exposure to respirable
crystalline silica.

Clean-up Methods

Jobsite clean-up shall be conducted using the following methods:

1.  Wet sweeping

2.  HEPA-filtered vacuuming

Compressed Air

Employees shall not use compressed air to clean clothing or surfaces
where such activity could contribute to employee exposure to RCS.

Disposal

Dust may be disposed of with standard trash, but must be done in a
manner that limits both dust generation and exposure to airborne RCS.

10. Exposure Assessment

[Company Name] will conduct representative RCS exposure assessments when
necessary, and on a routine basis, to identify additional activities
beyond those indicated in Appendix C.1 that may require the use of
engineering control methods or PPE.

Air Monitoring

Personnel exposure monitoring shall be conducted [Company Name] through
air sampling to determine:

1.  Employees’ level of exposure to RCS during specific activities

2.  If engineering controls are effectively working to reduce dust
    generation

3.  The need for respiratory protection during a specific activity

Requests for Air Monitoring

1.  If an employee is potentially exposed to respirable crystalline
    silica and engaged in a task using equipment in a way that is not
    listed in Appendix C.1, they must contact [Company Name] for an
    exposure assessment to determine the engineering controls, work
    practices, and respiratory protection requirements for that task.

2.  Air monitoring can be requested by either contacting [Health and
    Safety Officer Title]

11. Medical Surveillance

1.  [Company Name] employees that are required to wear a respirator for
    protection against ARCS for 30 or more days per year shall be
    entered in the [Company Name] Medical Surveillance Program. If a
    respirator is worn for any portion of a day, it counts as one day
    for the purpose of this 30-day provision.

2.  This medical surveillance program will follow guidelines set forth
    in OSHA 29 CFR 1926.1153 and all applicable regulations.

3.  All contractors will be responsible for implementing a medical
    surveillance program for their own employees.

Initial Examination Requirements

Medical surveillance requires an initial medical examination by a
physician or other licensed health-care professional (PLHCP) consisting
of a chest x-ray and establishment of a medical and work history with
emphasis on past, present, and anticipated exposure to silica, dust, and
other agents affecting the respiratory system.

Period Examination Requirements

Employees enrolled in the Medical Surveillance Program for RCS exposure
are required to have periodic medical examinations, which include a
chest x-ray, at least once every 3 years.

12. Training

[Company Name] employees that conduct work that potentially exposes them
to airborne RCS shall attend Silica Training, provided by [Company
Name], prior to conducting such work. Training is designed to educate
employees on the hazards involved with RCS, as well as regulatory and
procedural requirements. Once training is complete, employees will be
deemed Competent Persons.

Competent Person

Employees that are deemed Competent Persons for work involving airborne
RCS are expected to identify and address hazards that are non-compliant
with the SECP.

13. REVIEW AND RECORDKEPING

Program Review

This Silica Exposure Control Program shall be reviewed and updated at
least annually and whenever necessary to reflect changes in [Company
Name] policies or procedures, industry standards, or government
regulations.

Records

[Company Name] will maintain training records related to Silica Exposure
Control.

Program Recordkeeping

Records of this Silica Exposure Control Program will be considered
obsolete when the new version is issued. Obsolete versions will be
destroyed after three years.

APPENDICES

Appendix A: Definitions

Action Level (AL) means a concentration designated for specific
substance that initiates certain required activities, such as
implementing exposure controls, or conducting exposure monitoring.

Competent Person means one who is capable of identifying existing and
predictable hazards in the surroundings or working conditions which are
unsanitary, hazardous, or dangerous to employees, and who has
authorization to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate them.

Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) means the maximum concentration of a
specific substance that an employee is allowed to be exposed to over an
8-hour shift, without suffering adverse health effects. The PEL for RCS
is 50 micrograms per cubic meter.

Silicosis means lung fibrosis caused by the inhalation of dust
containing silica.

Time-Weighted Average (TWA) means a method used to calculate an
employee’s daily exposure to a hazardous substance, averaged over an
8-hour workday. TWAs take into account the substance concentrations and
the amount of time an employee is exposed to that substance.

Appendix B: Acronyms

AL Action Level

CFR Code of Federal Regulations

ECP Exposure Control Plan

PAPR Powered Air-Purifying Respirator

PEL Permissible Exposure Limit

PPE Personal Protective Equipment

RCS Respirable Crystalline Silica

TWA Time-Weighted Average

TABLE 1

+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
| Eq           |              | Required     |          |            |
| uipment/Task |  Engineering | Respirator   |          |            |
|              |   and Work   | Protection   |          |            |
|              |   Practice   | and minimum  |          |            |
|              |   Control    | assigned     |          |            |
|              |   Methods    | protection   |          |            |
|              |              | factor (APR) |          |            |
+==============+==============+==============+==========+============+
|              |              | Indo         |   ≤4     |   >4       |
|              |              | ors/outdoors |          |            |
|              |              |              | hr/shift |   hr/shift |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
| Stationary   | -   Use saw  | -            | None     | None       |
| Masonry Saws |     equipped |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   integrated |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     delivery |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |     that     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | continuously |              |          |            |
|              |     feeds    |              |          |            |
|              |     water to |              |          |            |
|              |     the      |              |          |            |
|              |     blade    |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
| Handheld     | -   Use saw  | When used    | None     | APF 10     |
| power saws   |              | outdoors     |          |            |
| (any blade   |     equipped |              |          |            |
| diameter)    |       with   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   integrated |              |          |            |
|              |       water  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |     delivery |              |          |            |
|              |       system |              |          |            |
|              |       that   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | continuously |              |          |            |
|              |       feeds  |              |          |            |
|              |       water  |              |          |            |
|              |       to the |              |          |            |
|              |       blade  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |       and    |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |       tool   |              |          |            |
|              |       in     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |       with   |              |          |            |
|              |       ma     |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |       to     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |       dust   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   emissions: |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   When     |              |          |            |
|              |       used   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |     outdoors |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              |              | When used    | APF 10   | APF 10     |
|              |              | indoors or   |          |            |
|              |              | in enclose   |          |            |
|              |              | areas        |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Handheld   |   For tasks  | -            | None     | None       |
|   power saws |   performed  |              |          |            |
|   for        |   outdoors   |              |          |            |
|   cutting    |   only:      |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
| fiber-cement | -   Use saw  |              |          |            |
|   board      |     equipped |              |          |            |
|   (with      |     with     |              |          |            |
|   blade      |              |              |          |            |
|   diameter   | commercially |              |          |            |
|   of 8       |              |              |          |            |
|   inches or  |    available |              |          |            |
|   less)      |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   collection |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    collector |              |          |            |
|              |     must     |              |          |            |
|              |     provide  |              |          |            |
|              |     the air  |              |          |            |
|              |     flow     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  recommended |              |          |            |
|              |     by the   |              |          |            |
|              |     tool     |              |          |            |
|              |     m        |              |          |            |
|              | anufacturer, |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater, |              |          |            |
|              |     and have |              |          |            |
|              |     a filter |              |          |            |
|              |     with 99% |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   efficiency |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Use saw  | When used    | None     | APF 10     |
|  Walk-behind |     equipped | outdoors     |          |            |
|   saws       |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   integrated |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     delivery |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |     that     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | continuously |              |          |            |
|              |     feeds    |              |          |            |
|              |     water to |              |          |            |
|              |     the      |              |          |            |
|              |     blade    |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   emissions: |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -            |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              |              | When used    | APF 10   | APF 10     |
|              |              | indoors or   |          |            |
|              |              | in enclose   |          |            |
|              |              | areas        |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Drivable   |   For tasks  | -            | None     | None       |
|   saws       |   performed  |              |          |            |
|              |   outdoors   |              |          |            |
|              |   only:      |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Use saw  |              |          |            |
|              |     equipped |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   integrated |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     delivery |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |     that     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | continuously |              |          |            |
|              |     feeds    |              |          |            |
|              |     water to |              |          |            |
|              |     the      |              |          |            |
|              |     blade    |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Use tool | -            | None     | None       |
|  Rig-mounted |     equipped |              |          |            |
|   core saws  |     with     |              |          |            |
|   or drills  |              |              |          |            |
|              |   integrated |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     delivery |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |     that     |              |          |            |
|              |     supplies |              |          |            |
|              |     water to |              |          |            |
|              |     cutting  |              |          |            |
|              |     surface  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Handheld   | -   Use      | -            | None     | None       |
|   and        |     drill    |              |          |            |
|   s          |     equipped |              |          |            |
| tand-mounted |     with     |              |          |            |
|   drills     |              |              |          |            |
|   (including | commercially |              |          |            |
|   impact and |              |              |          |            |
|   rotary     |    available |              |          |            |
|   hammer     |     shroud   |              |          |            |
|   drills)    |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     cowling  |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   collection |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    collector |              |          |            |
|              |     must     |              |          |            |
|              |     provide  |              |          |            |
|              |     the air  |              |          |            |
|              |     flow     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  recommended |              |          |            |
|              |     by the   |              |          |            |
|              |     tool     |              |          |            |
|              |     m        |              |          |            |
|              | anufacturer, |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater, |              |          |            |
|              |     and have |              |          |            |
|              |     a filter |              |          |            |
|              |     with 99% |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   efficiency |              |          |            |
|              |     and a    |              |          |            |
|              |     fil      |              |          |            |
|              | ter-cleaning |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    mechanism |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Use a    |              |          |            |
|              |     H        |              |          |            |
|              | EPA-filtered |              |          |            |
|              |     vacuum   |              |          |            |
|              |     when     |              |          |            |
|              |     cleaning |              |          |            |
|              |     holes    |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
| Eq           |              | Required     |          |            |
| uipment/Task |  Engineering | Respirator   |          |            |
|              |   and Work   | Protection   |          |            |
|              |   Practice   | and minimum  |          |            |
|              |   Control    | assigned     |          |            |
|              |   Methods    | protection   |          |            |
|              |              | factor (APR) |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              |              | Indo         |   ≤4     |   >4       |
|              |              | ors/outdoors |          |            |
|              |              |              | hr/shift | hr/shift   |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
| Dowel        |   For tasks  | -            | APF 10   | APF 10     |
| drilling     |   performed  |              |          |            |
| rigs for     |   outdoors   |              |          |            |
| concrete     |   only:      |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Use      |              |          |            |
|              |     shroud   |              |          |            |
|              |     around   |              |          |            |
|              |     drill    |              |          |            |
|              |     bit with |              |          |            |
|              |     a dust   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   collection |              |          |            |
|              |     system.  |              |          |            |
|              |     Dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    collector |              |          |            |
|              |     must     |              |          |            |
|              |     have a   |              |          |            |
|              |     filter   |              |          |            |
|              |     with 99% |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   efficiency |              |          |            |
|              |     and a    |              |          |            |
|              |     filter   |              |          |            |
|              |     cleaning |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    mechanism |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Use a    |              |          |            |
|              |     H        |              |          |            |
|              | EPA-filtered |              |          |            |
|              |     vacuum   |              |          |            |
|              |     when     |              |          |            |
|              |     cleaning |              |          |            |
|              |     holes    |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
| Veh          | -   Use dust | -            | None     | None       |
| icle-mounted |              |              |          |            |
| drilling     |   collection |              |          |            |
| rigs for     |     system   |              |          |            |
| rock and     |     with     |              |          |            |
| concrete     |     close    |              |          |            |
|              |     capture  |              |          |            |
|              |     hood or  |              |          |            |
|              |     shroud   |              |          |            |
|              |     around   |              |          |            |
|              |     drill    |              |          |            |
|              |     bit with |              |          |            |
|              |     a        |              |          |            |
|              |     low-flow |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     spray to |              |          |            |
|              |     wet the  |              |          |            |
|              |     dust at  |              |          |            |
|              |     the      |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    discharge |              |          |            |
|              |     point    |              |          |            |
|              |     from the |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    collector |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | OR           |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Operate  | -            | None     | None       |
|              |     from     |              |          |            |
|              |     within   |              |          |            |
|              |     an       |              |          |            |
|              |     enclosed |              |          |            |
|              |     cab and  |              |          |            |
|              |     use      |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     for dust |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  suppression |              |          |            |
|              |     on drill |              |          |            |
|              |     bit      |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Use tool | When used    | None     | APF 10     |
|  Jackhammers |     with     | outdoors     |          |            |
|   and        |     water    |              |          |            |
|   handheld   |     delivery |              |          |            |
|   powered    |     system   |              |          |            |
|   chipping   |     that     |              |          |            |
|   tools      |     supplies |              |          |            |
|              |     a        |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   continuous |              |          |            |
|              |     stream   |              |          |            |
|              |     or spray |              |          |            |
|              |     of water |              |          |            |
|              |     at the   |              |          |            |
|              |     point of |              |          |            |
|              |     impact   |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              |              | When used    | APF 10   | APF 10     |
|              |              | indoors or   |          |            |
|              |              | in enclose   |          |            |
|              |              | areas        |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | OR           |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Use tool | When used    | None     | APF 10     |
|              |     equipped | outdoors     |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | commercially |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    available |              |          |            |
|              |     shroud   |              |          |            |
|              |     and dust |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   collection |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    collector |              |          |            |
|              |     must     |              |          |            |
|              |     provide  |              |          |            |
|              |     the air  |              |          |            |
|              |     flow     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  recommended |              |          |            |
|              |     by the   |              |          |            |
|              |     tool     |              |          |            |
|              |     m        |              |          |            |
|              | anufacturer, |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater, |              |          |            |
|              |     and have |              |          |            |
|              |     a filter |              |          |            |
|              |     with 99% |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   efficiency |              |          |            |
|              |     and a    |              |          |            |
|              |     fil      |              |          |            |
|              | ter-cleaning |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    mechanism |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              |              | When used    | APF 10   | APF 10     |
|              |              | indoors or   |          |            |
|              |              | in enclose   |          |            |
|              |              | areas        |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Handheld   | -   Use      | -            | APF 10   | APF 25     |
|   grinders   |     grinder  |              |          |            |
|   for mortar |     equipped |              |          |            |
|   removal    |     with     |              |          |            |
|   (i.e.      |              |              |          |            |
|   tu         | commercially |              |          |            |
| ck-pointing) |              |              |          |            |
|              |    available |              |          |            |
|              |     shroud   |              |          |            |
|              |     and dust |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   collection |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    collector |              |          |            |
|              |     must     |              |          |            |
|              |     provide  |              |          |            |
|              |     25 cubic |              |          |            |
|              |     feet per |              |          |            |
|              |     minute   |              |          |            |
|              |     (cfm) or |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |     of       |              |          |            |
|              |     airflow  |              |          |            |
|              |     per inch |              |          |            |
|              |     of wheel |              |          |            |
|              |     diameter |              |          |            |
|              |     and have |              |          |            |
|              |     a filter |              |          |            |
|              |     with 99% |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   efficiency |              |          |            |
|              |     and a    |              |          |            |
|              |     cyclonic |              |          |            |
|              |     p        |              |          |            |
|              | re-separator |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     filter-  |              |          |            |
|              |     cleaning |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    mechanism |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Eq         |              | Required     |          |            |
| uipment/Task |  Engineering | Respirator   |          |            |
|              |   and Work   | Protection   |          |            |
|              |   Practice   | and minimum  |          |            |
|              |   Control    | assigned     |          |            |
|              |   Methods    | protection   |          |            |
|              |              | factor (APR) |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              |              | Indo         |   ≤4     |   >4       |
|              |              | ors/outdoors |          |            |
|              |              |              | hr/shift | hr/shift   |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Handheld   |   For tasks  | -            | None     | None       |
|   grinders   |   performed  |              |          |            |
|   for uses   |   outdoors   |              |          |            |
|   other than |   only:      |              |          |            |
|   mortar     |              |              |          |            |
|   removal    | -   Use      |              |          |            |
|              |     grinder  |              |          |            |
|              |     equipped |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   integrated |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     delivery |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |     that     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | continuously |              |          |            |
|              |     feeds    |              |          |            |
|              |     water to |              |          |            |
|              |     the      |              |          |            |
|              |     grinding |              |          |            |
|              |     surface  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | OR           |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Use      | When used    | None     | APF 10     |
|              |     grinder  | outdoors     |          |            |
|              |     equipped |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | commercially |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    available |              |          |            |
|              |     shroud   |              |          |            |
|              |     and dust |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   collection |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    collector |              |          |            |
|              |     must     |              |          |            |
|              |     provide  |              |          |            |
|              |     25 cubic |              |          |            |
|              |     feet per |              |          |            |
|              |     minute   |              |          |            |
|              |     (cfm) or |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |     of       |              |          |            |
|              |     airflow  |              |          |            |
|              |     per inch |              |          |            |
|              |     of wheel |              |          |            |
|              |     diameter |              |          |            |
|              |     and have |              |          |            |
|              |     a filter |              |          |            |
|              |     with 99% |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   efficiency |              |          |            |
|              |     and a    |              |          |            |
|              |     cyclonic |              |          |            |
|              |     p        |              |          |            |
|              | re-separator |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     filter-  |              |          |            |
|              |     cleaning |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   mechanism: |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              |              | When used    | APF 10   | APF 10     |
|              |              | indoors or   |          |            |
|              |              | in enclose   |          |            |
|              |              | areas        |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Use      | -            | None     | None       |
|  Walk-behind |     machine  |              |          |            |
|   milling    |     equipped |              |          |            |
|   machines   |     with     |              |          |            |
|   and floor  |              |              |          |            |
|   grinders   |   integrated |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     delivery |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |     that     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | continuously |              |          |            |
|              |     feeds    |              |          |            |
|              |     water to |              |          |            |
|              |     the      |              |          |            |
|              |     cutting  |              |          |            |
|              |     surface  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | OR           |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Use      | -            | None     | None       |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     equipped |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   collection |              |          |            |
|              |     system   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  recommended |              |          |            |
|              |     by the   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | manufacturer |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     tool in  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    collector |              |          |            |
|              |     must     |              |          |            |
|              |     provide  |              |          |            |
|              |     the air  |              |          |            |
|              |     flow     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  recommended |              |          |            |
|              |     by the   |              |          |            |
|              |     m        |              |          |            |
|              | anufacturer, |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater, |              |          |            |
|              |     and have |              |          |            |
|              |     a filter |              |          |            |
|              |     with 99% |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |     greater  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   efficiency |              |          |            |
|              |     and a    |              |          |            |
|              |     fil      |              |          |            |
|              | ter-cleaning |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    mechanism |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   When     |              |          |            |
|              |     used     |              |          |            |
|              |     indoors  |              |          |            |
|              |     or in an |              |          |            |
|              |     enclosed |              |          |            |
|              |     area,    |              |          |            |
|              |     use a    |              |          |            |
|              |     H        |              |          |            |
|              | EPA-filtered |              |          |            |
|              |     vacuum   |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     remove   |              |          |            |
|              |     loose    |              |          |            |
|              |     dust in  |              |          |            |
|              |     between  |              |          |            |
|              |     passes   |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Small      | -   Use a    | -            | None     | None       |
|   drivable   |     machine  |              |          |            |
|   milling    |     equipped |              |          |            |
|   machines   |     with     |              |          |            |
|   (less than |              |              |          |            |
|   half-lane) | supplemental |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     sprays   |              |          |            |
|              |     designed |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     suppress |              |          |            |
|              |     dust.    |              |          |            |
|              |     Water    |              |          |            |
|              |     must be  |              |          |            |
|              |     combined |              |          |            |
|              |     with a   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   surfactant |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Large      |   For cuts   | -            | None     | None       |
|   drivable   |   of any     |              |          |            |
|   milling    |   depth on   |              |          |            |
|   machines   |   asphalt    |              |          |            |
|   (half-lane |   only:      |              |          |            |
|   and        |              |              |          |            |
|   larger)    | -   Use      |              |          |            |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     equipped |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     exhaust  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  ventilation |              |          |            |
|              |     on drum  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    enclosure |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | supplemental |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     sprays   |              |          |            |
|              |     designed |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     suppress |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              |   For cuts   | -            | None     | None       |
|              |   of four    |              |          |            |
|              |   inches in  |              |          |            |
|              |   depth or   |              |          |            |
|              |   less on    |              |          |            |
|              |   any        |              |          |            |
|              |   substrate: |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Use      |              |          |            |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     equipped |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     exhaust  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  ventilation |              |          |            |
|              |     on drum  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    enclosure |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | supplemental |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     sprays   |              |          |            |
|              |     designed |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     suppress |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | OR           |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   Use a    | -            | None     | None       |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     equipped |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | supplemental |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     spray    |              |          |            |
|              |     designed |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     suppress |              |          |            |
|              |     dust.    |              |          |            |
|              |     Water    |              |          |            |
|              |     must be  |              |          |            |
|              |     combined |              |          |            |
|              |     with a   |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   surfactant |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
| Eq           | -            | Required     |          |            |
| uipment/Task |  Engineering | Respirator   |          |            |
|              |     and Work | Protection   |          |            |
|              |     Practice | and minimum  |          |            |
|              |     Control  | assigned     |          |            |
|              |     Methods  | protection   |          |            |
|              |              | factor (APR) |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -            | Indo         |   ≤4     |   >4       |
|              |              | ors/outdoors |          |            |
|              |              |              | hr/shift | hr/shift   |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
| Crushing     | -   Use      | -            | None     | None       |
| machines     |              |              |          |            |
|              |    equipment |              |          |            |
|              |     designed |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     deliver  |              |          |            |
|              |     water    |              |          |            |
|              |     spray or |              |          |            |
|              |     mist for |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  suppression |              |          |            |
|              |     at       |              |          |            |
|              |     crusher  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     other    |              |          |            |
|              |     points   |              |          |            |
|              |     where    |              |          |            |
|              |     dust is  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    generated |              |          |            |
|              |     (e.g.,   |              |          |            |
|              |     hoppers, |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   conveyers, |              |          |            |
|              |     s        |              |          |            |
|              | ieves/sizing |              |          |            |
|              |     or       |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    vibrating |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |  components, |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    discharge |              |          |            |
|              |     points)  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Operate  |              |          |            |
|              |     and      |              |          |            |
|              |     maintain |              |          |            |
|              |     machine  |              |          |            |
|              |     in       |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   accordance |              |          |            |
|              |     with     |              |          |            |
|              |     ma       |              |          |            |
|              | nufacturer's |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | instructions |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              | -   Use a    |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |   ventilated |              |          |            |
|              |     booth    |              |          |            |
|              |     that     |              |          |            |
|              |     provides |              |          |            |
|              |     fresh,   |              |          |            |
|              |     climat   |              |          |            |
|              | e-controlled |              |          |            |
|              |     air to   |              |          |            |
|              |     the      |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    operator, |              |          |            |
|              |     or a     |              |          |            |
|              |     remote   |              |          |            |
|              |     control  |              |          |            |
|              |     station  |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Heavy      | -   Operate  | -            | None     | None       |
|   equipment  |              |              |          |            |
|   and        |    equipment |              |          |            |
|   utility    |     from     |              |          |            |
|   vehicles   |     within   |              |          |            |
|   used to    |     an       |              |          |            |
|   abrade or  |     enclosed |              |          |            |
|   fracture   |     cab      |              |          |            |
|   silic      |              |              |          |            |
| a-containing | -   When     |              |          |            |
|   materials  |              |              |          |            |
|   (e.g.,     |    employees |              |          |            |
|              |     outside  |              |          |            |
| hoe-ramming, |     of the   |              |          |            |
|   rock       |     cab are  |              |          |            |
|   ripping)   |     engaged  |              |          |            |
|   or used    |     in the   |              |          |            |
|   during     |     task,    |              |          |            |
|   demolition |     apply    |              |          |            |
|   activities |     water    |              |          |            |
|   involving  |     and/or   |              |          |            |
|   silic      |     dust     |              |          |            |
| a-containing |              |              |          |            |
|   materials  | suppressants |              |          |            |
|              |     as       |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    necessary |              |          |            |
|              |     to       |              |          |            |
|              |     minimize |              |          |            |
|              |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    emissions |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|   Heavy      | -   Apply    | -            | None     | None       |
|   equipment  |     water    |              |          |            |
|   and        |     and/or   |              |          |            |
|   utility    |     dust     |              |          |            |
|   vehicles   |              |              |          |            |
|   for tasks  | suppressants |              |          |            |
|   such as    |     as       |              |          |            |
|   grading    |              |              |          |            |
|   and        |    necessary |              |          |            |
|   excavating |     to       |              |          |            |
|   but not    |     minimize |              |          |            |
|   including: |     dust     |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
| Demolishing, |    emissions |              |          |            |
|   abrading,  |              |              |          |            |
|   or         |              |              |          |            |
|   fracturing |              |              |          |            |
|   silica-    |              |              |          |            |
|   containing |              |              |          |            |
|   materials  |              |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | OR           |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+
|              | -   When the | -            | None     | None       |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    equipment |              |          |            |
|              |     operator |              |          |            |
|              |     is the   |              |          |            |
|              |     only     |              |          |            |
|              |     employee |              |          |            |
|              |     engaged  |              |          |            |
|              |     in the   |              |          |            |
|              |     task,    |              |          |            |
|              |     operate  |              |          |            |
|              |              |              |          |            |
|              |    equipment |              |          |            |
|              |     from     |              |          |            |
|              |     within   |              |          |            |
|              |     an       |              |          |            |
|              |     enclosed |              |          |            |
|              |     cab      |              |          |            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+----------+------------+

APPENDIX Q:

COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAM

For Compliance With

OSHA Rules and Regulations

Ref. TBD

[Company Name]

[Company Street Address]

[Company City, State Zip]

[Company Phone]

[Health and Safety Officer Name], the

[Health and Safety Officer Title]

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE

2.  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

    a.  Program Administrator Responsibilities

    b.  Supervisor Responsibility

    c.  Employee Responsibility

3.  DEFINITIONS

    a.  Primary Communicable Diseases of Concern

    b.  Additional Communicable Diseases

4.  PROGRAM ELEMENTS

    a.  Standard Precautions

    b.  Reporting Exposures at Work

    c.  Responding to Exposures

    d.  Medical Attention

5.  INFORMATION and TRAINING

    a.  Information

    b.  Health Alerts

    c.  Employee Trainin

6.  RECORDKEEPING

    a.  Record Retention Period

    b.  Information on Training Record

    c.  Processing of Training Records

    d.  Confidentiality

7.  REFERENCES

ATTACHMENT Q.1. - COVID-19 IN CONSTRUCTION (Cal-OSHA)

Attachment Q.2.—Certification of Training of (Authorized Personnel)

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

[Company Name] has developed this communicable disease policy and these
procedures to ensure the health and safety of employees. [Company Name]
is aware of the current medical pronouncements regarding the nature and
transmission of various communicable diseases, as well as the laws
regarding discrimination and communicable diseases. Decisions involving
persons who have communicable diseases shall be based on current and
well-informed medical judgments concerning the disease, the risks of
transmitting the illness to others, the symptoms and special
circumstances of each individual who has a communicable disease, and a
careful weighing of the identified risks and the available alternative
for responding to an employee with a communicable disease

[Company Name] will strive to provide periodic communicable disease
orientation to its employees, and shall also periodically inform
employees of the communicable disease policy and make available assorted
publications, brochures, etc., deemed appropriate to enhance the
education and understanding of the workforce. This education is provided
to help employees understand how communicable diseases spread, how to
reduce the risk of exposure and to reduce unrealistic fears of
contacting a communicable disease.

This program applies to all [Company Name] employees. [Company Name]
will comply with all applicable statutes and regulations that protect
the privacy of persons who have a communicable disease. Every effort
will be made to ensure procedurally sufficient safeguards to maintain
the personal confidence about persons who have communicable diseases.

Persons infected or reasonably believed to be infected with communicable
diseases will not be excluded from employment, or restricted in their
duties or access to facilities unless medically-based judgments in
individual cases establish that exclusion or restriction is necessary to
the welfare of the individual, or others associated with the institution
through clinical, cooperative, intern, or other such experiences
involving the general public.

PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

Program Administrator Responsibilities

  [Health and Safety Officer Name], the [Health and Safety Officer
  Title], has the authority and responsibility for implementing and
  maintaining this Communicable Disease Program for [Company Name]

General responsibilities for the Program Administrator include, but are
not limited to, the following:

i.  Ensuring that general communicable disease safety training is
    provided;

ii. Ensuring that communicable disease exposure investigations, and
    evaluation of exposure control measures are completed;

iii. Ensuring that employee training records are maintained; and

iv. Work closely with local authorities, as needed to investigate all
    reports of exposure via laboratory reports, patient symptoms and
    other pertinent information.

Supervisor Responsibility

  Supervisors are responsible for ensuring employee compliance with all
  the procedures outlined in this program by:

i.  Ensuring compliance with this program in their work area(s);

ii. Reporting communicable diseases exposures immediately to the [Health
    and Safety Officer Title]

Employee Responsibility

Employees are responsible for the following procedures.

i.  Employees are to comply with standard hygiene and housekeeping
    practices in order to reduce transmission of communicable diseases
    in the workplace;

ii. Know the provisions of the [Company Name] Communicable Disease
    policy;

iii. Responsible for the daily maintenance and upkeep of their work
     area(s);

iv. Report communicable disease exposures and possible unsafe conditions
    immediately to their supervisor;

v.  Following standard precautions to prevent communicable disease
    transmission (i.e., hand washing, respiratory etiquette, etc.); and

vi. Wear/utilize personal protective equipment (PPE) and engineering
    controls when recommended and provided.

DEFINITIONS

Primary Communicable Diseases of Concern

Communicable disease is a health-threatening disease or illness due to
an infectious agent or its toxic products which is transmitted directly
or indirectly to a person from an infected person or animal through the
agency of an intermediate animal, host or vector, or through the
inanimate environment.

The following provides general information[12] on the five (5) primary
diseases of concern at [Company Name].

i.  Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus: SARS-CoV 2 or
      COVID-19 is a severe respiratory illness that is caused by a
      coronavirus, is transmitted especially by contact with infectious
      material (such as respiratory droplets or body fluids), and is
      characterized by fever, headache, body aches, a dry
      cough, hypoxia, and usually pneumonia. COVID-19 can cause severe
      respiratory failure and death.

  People with COVID-19 have had a wide range of symptoms reported –
  ranging from mild symptoms to severe illness. Symptoms may appear 2-14
  days after exposure to the virus. People with these symptoms may have
  COVID-19:

-   Fever or chills

-   Cough

-   Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing

-   Fatigue

-   Muscle or body aches

-   Headache

-   New loss of taste or smell

-   Sore throat

-   Congestion or runny nose

-   Nausea or vomiting

-   Diarrhea

ii. Influenza: Influenza is a communicable disease that includes
      symptoms such as fever, headache, tiredness, dry cough, sore
      throat, nasal congestion, and body aches. While most people who
      get influenza recover, some individuals will develop
      life-threatening complications such as pneumonia. [Company Name]
      underwrites the cost of these vaccinations. Employees are
      encouraged, but not required, to obtain a flu vaccination.

iii. Shingles: Shingles is caused by the varicella zoster virus, the
       same virus that causes chickenpox. After a person recovers from
       chickenpox, the virus stays in the body in a dormant (inactive)
       state. For reasons that are not fully known, the virus can
       reactivate years later, causing shingles. Shingles usually starts
       as a painful rash on one side of the face or body. The rash forms
       blisters that typically scab over in 7–10 days and clears up
       within 2–4 weeks. Shingles is less contagious than chickenpox and
       the risk of a person with shingles spreading the virus is low if
       the rash is covered.

iv. Tuberculosis: Tuberculosis (TB) is a disease that is spread from
      person to person through the air. The general symptoms include
      feeling sick or weak, weight loss, fever, and night sweats. The
      symptoms of TB of the lungs include coughing, chest pain, and
      coughing of blood. TB can also affect other parts of the body such
      as the kidneys. Employees who suspect they may have been infected
      with tuberculosis should contact their healthcare provider for a
      tuberculin skin test and if the skin test is positive, for a
      follow-up X ray.

v.  Staph Infection: Staphylococcus aureus, often referred to simply as
      “staph,” are bacteria healthy people can carry on the skin or in
      the nose. Staph bacteria commonly cause skin infections, such as
      boils. Most of these infections are not life-threatening.

  In addition to skin infections, staph bacteria can cause infections in
  the blood, in the bones and in the lungs (pneumonia). Most serious
  staph bacterial infections are treated with an antibiotic related to
  penicillin. However, some staph bacteria have become resistant to
  antibiotics, including the commonly used penicillin-related
  antibiotics. These resistant bacteria are called methicillin-resistant
  Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA.

Additional Communicable Diseases 

Communicable disease prevention efforts at [Company Name] shall address
the specific diseases of concern, as described above. The following
information2 regarding additional communicable diseases is incorporated
for informational purposes. This list includes diseases which may be
common for similar work activities; this does not represent an
exhaustive list of all communicable diseases. Questions regarding
diseases or conditions not discussed here should be directed to the
[Health and Safety Officer Title].

i.  Conjunctivitis/Pink Eye: Conjunctivitis is a common eye condition
    worldwide. It causes inflammation (swelling) of the conjunctiva—the
    thin layer that lines the inside of the eyelid and covers the white
    part of the eye. Conjunctivitis is often called "pink eye" or "red
    eye" because it can cause the white of the eye to take on a pink or
    red color.

  The most common causes of conjunctivitis are viruses, bacteria, and
  allergens. But there are other causes, including chemicals, fungi,
  certain diseases, and contact lens use (especially the extended-wear
  type). Viral and bacterial conjunctivitis can be easily spread from
  person to person and can cause epidemics. Simple good hygiene
  practices can greatly reduce the risk of getting conjunctivitis or of
  passing it on to someone else.

ii. Meningitis: Meningitis is a disease caused by the inflammation of
    the protective membranes covering the brain and spinal cord known as
    the meninges. The inflammation is usually caused by an infection of
    the fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord. Meningitis may
    develop in response to a number of causes including bacterial,
    viral, parasitic, fungal, and noninfectious meningitis (caused by
    physical injury, cancer or certain drugs). The severity of illness
    and the treatment for meningitis differ depending on the cause.
    Thus, it is important to know the specific cause of meningitis.

  Bacterial meningitis is contagious; the bacteria are spread through
  the exchange of respiratory and throat secretions (i.e., kissing).
  Enteroviruses, the most common cause of viral meningitis, are most
  often spread from person to person through fecal contamination (which
  can occur when changing a diaper or using the toilet and not properly
  washing hands afterwards).

iii. Pertussis/Whooping Cough: Pertussis, a respiratory illness commonly
     known as whooping cough, is a very contagious disease caused by a
     type of bacteria called Bordetella pertussis. These bacteria attach
     to the cilia (tiny, hair-like extensions) that line part of the
     upper respiratory system. The bacteria release toxins, which damage
     the cilia and cause inflammation (swelling).

  Pertussis is a very contagious disease only found in humans and is
  spread from person to person. People with pertussis usually spread the
  disease by coughing or sneezing while in close contact with others,
  who then breathe in the pertussis bacteria. Pertussis vaccines can be
  very effective in protecting individuals from contracting the disease.

iv. MRSA: The official name of this infection is Community-Associated
    Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (CA-MRSA). MRSA is a
    type of staph infection that is resistant to some antibiotics,
    including methicillin, oxacillin, penicillin, and amoxicillin. Staph
    or MRSA infections usually show up as skin infections, such as
    pimples and boils, and occur in otherwise healthy people. MRSA is
    often spread by skin-to-skin contact or contact with shared items,
    such as towels, or surfaces that have come in contact with someone
    else’s infection.

v.  Hepatitis: Hepatitis A is a liver disease caused by the hepatitis A
    virus. Symptoms include jaundice, fatigue, abdominal pain, loss of
    appetite, intermittent nausea, fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. It is
    transmitted by fecal-oral material, food/waterborne outbreaks, or it
    can be blood borne (rare). Persons with hepatitis A can spread the
    virus to others who live in the same household or with whom they
    have sexual contact. Casual contact as in the usual office setting
    does not spread the virus.

vi. Measles: Measles (also called rubeola) is a respiratory disease
    caused by the measles virus. A typical case of measles begins with
    mild to moderate fever, cough, runny nose, red eyes, and sore
    throat. Two or three days after symptoms begin, tiny white spots
    (Koplik’s spots) may appear inside the mouth.

  Measles is highly contagious and can be spread to others from four
  days before to four days after the rash appears. The virus lives in
  the mucus in the nose and throat of the infected person, can be
  dispersed into the air from a sneeze, and can live on infected
  surfaces for up to 2 hours. Measles can be effectively prevented by
  the combination MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella) vaccine.

Program Elements

Standard Precautions

Standard Precautions represent the minimum prevention measures in any
setting where healthcare is delivered and may be adapted in other
environments (i.e. office, jobsite) to minimize the spread of
communicable diseases. These evidence-based practices are designed to
both protect employees and prevent the spread of infections.

Standard Precautions include:

-   Hand Hygiene

-   Use of personal protective equipment (e.g., gloves, facemasks),
    depending on the anticipated exposure;

-   Respiratory Hygiene and cough etiquette.

-   Safe handling of potentially contaminated equipment or surfaces.

i.  Hand Hygiene: Hand hygiene procedures include the use of
    alcohol-based hand rubs (containing 60-95% alcohol) and hand washing
    with soap and water. Alcohol-based hand rub is the preferred method
    for decontaminating hands, except when hands are visibly soiled
    (e.g., dirt, blood, body fluids), in which case soap and water
    should be used. Hand hygiene stations should be strategically placed
    to ensure easy access.

    a.  Using Alcohol-based Hand Rub (follow manufacturer’s directions):

        i.  Dispense the recommended volume of product;

        ii. Apply product to the palm of one hand; and

        iii. Rub hands together, covering all surfaces of hands and
             fingers until they are dry (no rinsing is required).

    b.  Hand washing with Soap and Water:

        i.  Wet hands first with water (avoid using hot water).

        ii. Apply soap to hands.

        iii. Rub hands vigorously for at least 15 seconds, covering all
             surfaces of hands and fingers.

        iv. Rinse hands with water and dry thoroughly with paper towel.

        v.  Use paper towel to turn off water faucet.

ii. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): Personal protective equipment
      use involves specialized clothing or equipment worn by for
      protection against infectious materials. The selection of PPE is
      based on the nature of the task at hand and potential for exposure
      to blood, body fluids or infectious agents.

A review of available PPE should be performed periodically (e.g.,
annually) due to new product developments, improvements and practices.
Appropriate PPE for all job tasks at [Company Name] has been determined
by the [Health and Safety Officer Title], and can be attained by
reviewing the employee Job Hazard Assessment by classification.

iii. Respiratory Hygiene: Employees should avoid airborne spread of
       infectious diseases by sneezing or coughing into their elbow.
       Clean and sterilize respirator protection equipment using
       appropriate guidelines for specific disease control. See:
       https://consteril.com/covid-19-pandemic-disinfection-and-sterilization-of-face-masks-for-viruses/

iv. Safe Handling of Contaminated Surfaces and Equipment: Contaminated
      surfaces, equipment shall vehicles be properly and regularly
      cleaned with disinfectants. Any contaminated PPE or other
      disposable equipment should be properly discarded.

Reporting Exposures at Work

[Company Name] has established procedures to follow when employees come
into contact with another employee who has a communicable disease. Any
employee, who is exposed to a communicable disease or becomes aware of
another employee who may have been exposed to a communicable disease
while at work, will immediately contact his or her supervisor, and the
following protocol shall apply:

i.  The appropriate healthcare provider will coordinate all treatment of
    those employees who are exposed at work to a communicable disease.
    Medical treatment will be provided in accordance with [Company Name]
    written Injury and Illness Prevention Program (IIPP).

ii. If hospitalization is required, the employee will be instructed to
    go to appropriate medical facility.

iii. If a period of convalescence and/or isolation is required due to an
     exposure to a communicable disease, this will be arranged in
     accordance with [Company Name] regarding medical leave and Worker’s
     Compensation.

iv. The employee will complete and submit a report to [Health and Safety
    Officer Name] that includes the following information:

    a.  The circumstances concerning the encounter, including the known
        or suspected nature of the disease;

    b.  The name and address of the infected person;

    c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the physician who is
        attending the infected person, if known;

    d.  The names of all employees who have come in contact with the
        person suspected of being infected with a communicable disease;
        and

    e.  Any recommendations, diagnosis, and/or treatment given by the
        company-authorized occupational healthcare provider.

    f.  Persons who are infected with the pandemic flu, or know of
        someone at work who is, should contact the [Health and Safety
        Officer Name] immediately.

Responding to Exposures

All employees are expected to report possible exposure to their
supervisor. All possible exposures shall then be reported to the [Health
and Safety Officer Title] by email and phone and an initial
investigation shall be conducted by the [Health and Safety Officer
Title].

The [Health and Safety Officer Name] assist with issues relating to
communicable diseases. [Health and Safety Officer Name] should work
cooperatively with the state board of health, the county health
department, employees, the healthcare provider, and physicians in order
to provide a support system for affected persons, design, a plan to
accommodate work assignments, design a plan to reduce exposure in the
workplace, and allay fears at work.

All persons involved in these matters shall be required to treat all
proceedings, deliberations, and

documents as confidential information. Confidential medical information
should be shared with

designated company and/or medical personnel in accordance with
applicable health privacy law (i.e., HIPAA).

i.  [Health and Safety Officer Title] shall investigate the exposure via
    laboratory reports, patient symptoms and other pertinent
    information. Information gained during the investigation will be
    provided to the Company Owner.

    a.  If the communicable disease diagnosis is ruled out, the [Health
        and Safety Officer Title] will notify the Company Owner and no
        further action is required.

    b.  If the communicable disease diagnosis is confirmed, or exposure
        follow-up is required, the [Health and Safety Officer Title]
        will take the following actions:

        i.  Identify times, locations, organism and communicable period,
            and determine the preliminary timeline of exposure,
            incubation and transmission;

        ii. Confer to determine initial extent of exposure; and

        iii. When immediate action is required, convenes a management
             meeting within 24 hours of initial report.

ii. [Health and Safety Officer Title] will initiate the required
    notification to the local or state public health authorities after
    reporting the findings to the company owner.

Medical Attention

i.  Medical Examinations: Medical examinations shall be conducted by
    authorized occupational physician(s); please refer to the [Company
    Name] Injury and Illness Prevention Program (IIPP).

ii. Vaccinations: In general, [Company Name] does not require employees
    to receive vaccinations; receipt of vaccinations shall occur on a
    voluntary basis.

iii. Confidentiality: An employee’s medical condition will be maintained
     in confidence in accordance with applicable law, such as the ADA,
     the FMLA, GINA, HIPAA, state’s workers’ compensation statute, etc.,
     and information regarding an employee’s health is to be provided
     only to those persons with a need to know. Employees are expected
     to report information only as required by applicable law.

iv. Medical Reports: The supervisor, [Health and Safety Officer Title],
    and, if appropriate, a consulting physician shall determine if a
    statement should be obtained from the employee’s attending
    healthcare provider that the employee’s continued presence at work
    will pose no significant current risk of substantial harm to the
    employee, co-workers, or students. The employee’s consent to such
    reports will be obtained in accordance with applicable law.

v.  Worker’s Compensation and Work Restrictions: If a communicable
    illness is work related, the employee is to report that fact to the
    [Health and Safety Officer Title]. [Company Name] will follow all
    work restriction guidelines outlined by the local or state Public
    Health Department of Public Health. Information shall be provided
    immediately to [Health and Safety Officer Title] and supervisor
    regarding work restrictions for employees.

vi. Required Medical Leave: Employees with a communicable disease may
    have rights for leave under the medical leave policy or under the
    FMLA. Supervisors should refer any questions regarding leave policy
    and the FMLA to Human Resources.

vii. Employee Refusal to Work: In the event an employee refuses to work
     with a fellow employee because they perceive he or she has a
     contagious disease, the employee’s supervisor will address the
     issue and Human Resources may intervene depending on the severity
     of the situation.

viii. Discipline: Employee work performance responsibilities and the
      [Company Name] IIPP include guidelines regarding implementation of
      any disciplinary action in the event an employee fails to follow a
      physician’s instructions (to control the spread of communicable
      diseases), or if an employee fails to follow standard hygiene
      procedures to control the spread of communicable diseases.

INFORMATION and TRAINING

Information

[Company Name] will present the communicable disease policy and related
topics to employees via any of the following methods:

i.  Workshops/Webinars

ii. Safety Newsletter

iii. Company Newsletter

iv. Safety Meetings and Toolbox Talks

v.  Emergency Notification System

vi. Social Media/Safety Applications

Health Alerts

Health alerts may also be distributed, as needed, via the following
methods:

i.  Company E-mail

ii. Group Text Messages

iii. Safety Newsletter/ Memo

iv. Emergency Notification System

v.  Poster/flyer Campaigns

Employee Training

i.  [Company Name] will provide training to each employee. Initial
    training will cover the following:

    a.  The [Company Name] Communicable Disease policy; and

    b.  Instruction on the principal means by which communicable
        diseases are spread; and

    c.  The best methods for restriction and prevention of such disease.

ii. Supervisors are responsible for ensuring that employees receive the
    appropriate training.

iii. All training must be documented by the individual presenting the
     training session and a copy of the training records will be
     submitted,

RECORDKEEPING

Record Retention Period

Records of employee communicable disease training, exposure reports,
exposure investigations, will be maintained for at least 5 years.

Information on Training Record

Employee training records shall include the name of the employees
trained, date and type of training provided, and the provider of the
training.

Processing of Training Records

Supervisors are responsible for ensuring:

employee training records are generated and

  a copy is sent to Human Resources to be maintained on file for five
  years.

Confidentiality

All medical information and records, verbal and written, concerning the
occupational exposure of an employee will not be disclosed or released
to anyone without the employee’s written consent except as required by
law. These records will be kept by the [Company Name] Human Resources
Department.

REFERENCES

-   OSHA General Duty Clause

-   Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)

-   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)

-   Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA)

-   Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)

ATTACHMENT Q1 - COVID-19 IN CONSTRUCTION

This section is directly taken from Cal/OSHA document entitled “COVID-19
Industry Construction: Construction” published May 12, 2020, with minor
changes for national applicability.

Background

During the Spring of 2020, several state governments issued an order
requiring most non-essential workers to stay at home to disrupt the
spread of COVID-19 among the population.

The impact of COVID-19 on the health of Americans is not yet fully
known. Reported illness ranges from very mild (some people have no
symptoms) to severe illness that may result in death. Certain groups,
including people aged 65 or older and those with serious underlying
medical conditions, such as heart or lung disease or diabetes, are at
higher risk of hospitalization and serious complications. Transmission
is most likely when people are in close contact with an infected person,
even if that person does not have any symptoms or has not yet developed
symptoms.

Precise information about the number and rates of COVID-19 by industry
or occupational groups, including among critical infrastructure workers,
is not available at this time. There have been multiple outbreaks in a
range of workplaces, indicating that workers are at risk of acquiring or
transmitting COVID-19 infection. Examples of these workplaces include
long-term care facilities, prisons, food production, warehouses, meat
processing plants, and grocery stores.

As stay-at-home orders are modified, it is essential that all possible
steps be taken to ensure the safety of workers and the public.

Key prevention practices include:

-   physical distancing to the maximum extent possible,

-   use of face coverings by employees (where respiratory protection is
    not required) and customers/clients,

-   frequent handwashing and regular cleaning and disinfection,

-   training employees on these and other elements of the COVID-19
    prevention plan.

In addition, it will be critical to have in place appropriate processes
to identify new cases of illness in workplaces and, when they are
identified, to intervene quickly and work with public health authorities
to halt the spread of the virus.

This section of the document provides guidance for the construction
industry to support a safe, clean environment for workers. The guidance
is not intended to revoke or repeal any employee rights, either
statutory, regulatory or collectively bargained, and is not exhaustive,
as it does not include specific state or county health orders, nor is it
a substitute for any existing safety and health-related regulatory
requirements.

Stay current on changes to public health guidance and state/local
orders, as the COVID-19 situation continues. OSHA has more safety and
health guidance on their webpage here. CDC has additional guidance for
businesses and employers.

Worksite Specific Plan 

-   Establish a written, worksite-specific COVID-19 prevention plan at
    every facility, perform a comprehensive risk assessment of all work
    areas, and designate a person at each facility to implement the
    plan.

-   Identify contact information for the local health department where
    the facility is located for communicating information about COVID-19
    outbreaks among employees.

-   Train and communicate with employees and employee representatives on
    the plan.

-   Regularly evaluate the workplace for compliance with the plan and
    document and correct deficiencies identified.

-   Investigate any COVID-19 illness and determine if any work-related
    factors could have contributed to risk of infection. Update the plan
    as needed to prevent further cases.

-   Identify close contacts (within six feet for 15 minutes or more) of
    an infected employee and take steps to isolate COVID-19 positive
    employee(s) and close contacts.

-   Adhere to the guidelines below. Failure to do so could result in
    workplace illnesses that may cause operations to be temporarily
    closed or limited.

Topics for Employee Training 

-   Information on COVID-19, how to prevent it from spreading, and which
    underlying health conditions may make individuals more susceptible
    to contracting the virus.

-   Self-screening at home, including temperature and/or symptom checks
    using CDC guidelines.

-   The importance of not coming to work if employees have a frequent
    cough, fever, difficulty breathing, chills, muscle pain, headache,
    sore throat, recent loss of taste or smell, or if they or someone
    they live with have been diagnosed with COVID-19.

-   To seek medical attention if their symptoms become severe, including
    persistent pain or pressure in the chest, confusion, or bluish lips
    or face. Updates and further details are available on CDC’s webpage.

-   The importance of frequent handwashing with soap and water,
    including scrubbing with soap for 20 seconds (or using hand
    sanitizer with at least 60% ethanol or 70% isopropanol when
    employees cannot get to a sink or handwashing station, per CDC
    guidelines).

-   The importance of physical distancing, both at work and off work
    time (see Physical Distancing section below).

-   Proper use of face coverings, including:

    -   Face coverings do not protect the wearer and are not personal
        protective equipment (PPE).

o Face coverings can help protect people near the wearer, but do not
replace the need for physical distancing and frequent handwashing.

-   Employees should wash or sanitize hands before and after using or
    adjusting face coverings.

-   Avoid touching eyes, nose, and mouth.

-   Face coverings should be washed after each shift.

-   Ensure temporary or contract workers at the facility are also
    properly trained in COVID-19 prevention policies and have necessary
    PPE. Discuss these responsibilities ahead of time with organizations
    supplying temporary and/or contract workers.

-   Information on employer or government-sponsored leave benefits the
    employee may be entitled to receive that would make it financially
    easier to stay at home. See additional information on government
    programs supporting sick leave and worker’s compensation for
    COVID-19, including employee’s sick leave rights under the Families
    First Coronavirus Response Act and employee’s rights to workers’
    compensation benefits and presumption of the work-relatedness of
    COVID-19.

Individual Control Measures and Screening 

-   Provide temperature and/or symptom screenings for all workers at the
    beginning of their shift and any vendors, contractors, or other
    workers entering the establishment. Make sure the
    temperature/symptom screener avoids close contact with workers to
    the extent possible. Both screeners and employees should wear face
    coverings for the screening.

-   If requiring self-screening at home, which is an appropriate
    alternative to providing it at the establishment, ensure that
    screening was performed prior to the worker leaving the home for
    their shift and follows CDC guidelines, as described in the Topics
    for Employee Training section above.

-   Encourage workers who are sick or exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19 to
    stay home.

-   Employers should provide and ensure workers use all required
    protective equipment, including face coverings and gloves where
    necessary.

-   Employers should consider where disposable glove use may be helpful
    to supplement frequent handwashing or use of hand sanitizer;
    examples are for workers who are screening others for symptoms or
    handling commonly touched items.

-   Face coverings strongly recommended when employees are in the
    vicinity of others. Workers should have face coverings available and
    wear them when on-site, in breakrooms and offices or in a vehicle
    for work-related travel when traveling with others. Face coverings
    must not be shared.

-   Non-employees entering the jobsite should be restricted to only
    those classified as essential by management and they must complete a
    temperature and/or symptom screening before entering. Delivery
    drivers, vendors, and all others entering the facility are required
    to wear face coverings.

Cleaning and Disinfecting Protocols 

-   Perform thorough cleaning on high traffic areas such as break rooms,
    lunch areas, and changing areas, and areas of ingress and egress
    including, stairways and stairwells, handrails, elevators controls
    and frequently disinfect commonly used surfaces, including,
    doorknobs, toilets, handwashing facilities, etc.

-   Clean touchable surfaces between shifts or between users, whichever
    is more frequent, including but not limited to working surfaces,
    tools, handles and latches, and controls on stationary and mobile
    equipment, including surfaces in the cabs of all vehicles.

-   Require workers to wash hands or use sanitizer between the use of
    shared equipment, such as workstation tools, radios, time clocks,
    mobilized carts, and other items and allow paid work time to do so.

-   Require that employer-owned and controlled equipment, such as hard
    hats and any face shields, be sanitized at the end of each shift.
    Clean and disinfect the inside of the equipment, then the outside,
    then wash hands.

-   Encourage workers who own their own hard hats to follow the same
    cleaning protocol and provide the proper cleaning and sanitation
    products. Allow paid work time to complete such cleaning.

-   Avoid sharing phones, office supplies, other work tools, or handheld
    mobile communications equipment wherever possible.
    Individually-assigned peripheral equipment (keyboards, handsets,
    headsets, chairs, etc.) should be provided wherever possible. If
    necessary, clean and disinfect them before and after each use. Never
    share PPE.

-   Provide time for workers to implement cleaning practices during
    their shift. Cleaning assignments should be assigned during working
    hours as part of the employee’s job duties.

-   Ensure that sanitary facilities stay operational and stocked at all
    times and provide additional soap, paper towels, and hand sanitizer
    when needed.

-   Provide additional sanitary facilities (including portable toilets
    and handwashing stations) if feasible and necessary to maintain
    physical distancing during scheduled breaks.

-   Install hands-free devices, if possible, including motion sensor
    sinks, soap dispensers, sanitizer dispensers, and paper towel
    dispensers.

-   When choosing cleaning chemicals, employers should use product
    approved for use against COVID-19 listed on the Environmental
    Protection Agency (EPA)-approved list and follow product
    instructions. Use disinfectant labels labeled to be effective
    against emerging viral pathogens, diluted household bleach solutions
    (5 tablespoons per gallon of water), or alcohol solutions with at
    least 70% alcohol that are appropriate for the surface. Provide
    employees training on manufacturer’s directions and Cal/OSHA
    requirements for safe use. Workers using cleaners or disinfectants
    should wear gloves as required by the product instructions.

-   Consider installing portable high-efficiency air cleaners, upgrading
    the building or construction trailer’s air filters to the highest
    efficiency possible, and making other modifications to increase the
    quantity of outside air and ventilation in work and break areas.

Physical Distancing Guidelines 

-   Implement measures to ensure physical distancing of at least six
    feet between workers. These can include use of physical partitions
    or visual cues (e.g., floor markings or signs to indicate to where
    workers should stand). Reassign personal staging areas to increase
    distance between employees. Designate separate entrance and exits
    and post signage to this effect.

-   Adjust on-site meetings to ensure physical distance and instead
    implement smaller individual safety meetings at the jobsite to
    maintain physical distancing guidelines. Transition other meetings
    and interviews to phone or digital platforms or hold outside or in a
    space allowing for at least six feet of physical distance between
    employees.

-   Consider offering workers who request modified duties options that
    minimize their contact with customers and other employees (e.g.,
    managing inventory rather than working as a cashier or managing
    administrative needs through telework).

-   Utilize work practices, when feasible and necessary, to limit the
    number of workers on the jobsite at one time. This may include
    scheduling (e.g. staggering shift start/end times) or rotating crew
    access to a designated area during a shift. Stage the jobsite to
    stagger work and limit overlap of work crews. Place additional
    limitations on the number of workers in enclosed areas, where six
    feet of separation may not be sufficient to limit transmission of
    the virus.

-   Stagger employee breaks, within compliance with wage and hour
    regulations, to maintain physical distancing protocols.

-   Close breakrooms, use barriers, or increase distance between
    tables/chairs to separate workers and discourage congregating during
    breaks. Where possible, create outdoor break areas with shade covers
    and seating that ensures physical distancing.

-   Workers should consider bringing a lunch made at home or purchase
    take out or delivery where available as long as they can avoid
    congested areas.

-   Use the following hierarchy to prevent transmission of COVID-19 in
    production and other work areas: engineering controls,
    administrative controls, and PPE.

    -   Engineering controls include creating physical or spatial
        barriers between employees such as Plexiglas or other sturdy and
        impermeable partitions. Where appropriate, install such barriers
        in offices to create separation between workers.

    -   Administrative controls include slowing operations and
        increasing shifts, within safety requirements, and ensuring
        adequate time for proper cleaning and disinfection protocols.

    -   PPE includes face shields, respiratory protection, and
        impermeable gloves. Note that some equipment such as some
        disposable face shields and N95 respirators are prioritized for
        health care workers. If those are in use, consider changing to
        reusable elastomeric respirators to conserve supplies for
        healthcare facilities.

    -   

Checklist

This checklist is intended to help construction employers implement
their plan to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in the workplace and is
supplemental to the Guidance for Construction Employers. This checklist
is a summary and contains shorthand for some parts of the guidance;
familiarize yourself with the guidance before using this checklist.

  Contents of Written Worksite Specific Plan
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  □ The person(s) responsible for implementing the plan.
  □ A risk assessment and the measures that will be taken to prevent spread of the virus.
  □ Training and communication with employees and employee representatives on the plan.
  □ A process to check for compliance and to document and correct deficiencies.
  □ A process to investigate COVID-cases, alert the local health department, and identify and isolate close workplace contacts of infected employees until they are tested.
  □ Update the plan as necessary to prevent further cases.
  Topics for Employee Training
  □ Information on COVID-19, preventing spread, and who is especially vulnerable.
  □ Self-screening at home, including temperature and/or symptom checks using CDC guidelines.
  □ The importance of not coming to work if employees have a frequent cough, fever, difficulty breathing, chills, muscle pain, headache, sore throat, recent loss of taste or smell, or if they or someone they live with have been diagnosed with COVID-19.
  □ When to seek medical attention.
  □ The importance of hand washing.
  □ The importance of physical distancing, both at work and off work time.
  □ Proper use of cloth face covers.
  Individual Control Measures & Screening
  □ Symptom screenings and/or temperature checks.
  □ Encourage workers who are sick or exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19 to stay home.
  □ Encourage frequent handwashing and use of hand sanitizer.
  □ Provide disposable gloves to workers using cleaners and disinfectants when required. Consider gloves as a supplement to frequent hand washing for other cleaning, tasks such as handling commonly touched items or conducting symptom screening.
  □ Strongly recommend cloth face covers.
  □ Restrict non-employee personnel on the job site, conduct screening and encourage the use of face masks or covers.
  Cleaning and Disinfecting Protocols
  □ Perform thorough cleaning in high traffic areas.
  □ Frequently disinfect commonly used surfaces.
  □ Clean and sanitize shared equipment between each use.
  □ Clean touchable surfaces between shifts or between users, whichever is more frequent.
  □ Require workers to wash hands or use sanitizer after using shared equipment.
  □ Sanitize PPE at the end of the shift.
  □ Avoid sharing phones, work tools, etc. wherever possible.
  □ Keep sanitary facilities stocked.
  □ Provide additional toilets and hand washing stations if needed for physical distancing during breaks.
  □ Use products approved for use against COVID-19 on the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-approved list and follow product instructions and Cal/OSHA requirements.
  □ Install hands-free devices if possible, including motion sensor sinks, soap dispensers, sanitizer dispensers, and paper towel dispensers.
  □ Consider upgrades to improve air filtration and ventilation.
  Physical Distancing Guidelines
  □ Implement measures to ensure workers are at least six feet apart.
  □ Adjust on-site meetings to ensure physical distancing.
  □ Limit the number of workers on the jobsite at one time if necessary.
  □ Stagger employee breaks, if needed, to maintain physical distancing protocols.
  □ Reconfigure break areas for physical distance.
  □ Avoid congested areas at lunch.

-   

ATTACHMENT Q.2.—Certification of Training (Authorized Personnel)

I certify that I have received training as an authorized employee under
[Company Name] Communicable Disease Control Program. I further certify
that I understand the procedures and will abide by those procedures.

___________________________________ ________________________

AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE DATE

[1] OSHA Directive CPL 2-0 120 D(3)(c)(2)

[2] OSHA 29 CFR § 1910.134 Appendix C, OSHA Respiratory Medical
Evaluation Questionnaire

[3] OSHA Directive CPL 2-0 120 Inspection Procedure for the Respiratory
Protection Standard

[4] OSHA Sections 1 and 2, Part A of Appendix C, Prior to implementing
the program, the company provides the PLHCP with a copy of the completed
Health Care Questionnaire.

[5] If the PLHCP and the noted conditions remain the same, the
information need not be provided for subsequent medical evaluations

[6] [Company Name] has evaluated its operations as required by the
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Standards in Subpart I, 29 CFR §
1910.132-138.

[7] As established in Appendix A of the OSHA standard (Attachment 1)

[8] The seal check procedures are performed in accordance with Appendix
B-1 of OSHA 29 CFR §1910 134 or the manufacturer’s direction (whichever
is most effective).

[9] The oxygen content (v/v) is between 19 5% and 23 5%, hydrocarbon
(condensed) content is 5 mg/m3 or less, carbon monoxide content is 10ppm
or less, and carbon dioxide content is 1,000.

[10] The Rainbow Passage: “When the sunlight strikes raindrops in the
air, they act like a prism and form a rainbow. The rainbow is a division
of white light into many beautiful colors. These take the shape of a
long round arch, with its path high above, and its two ends apparently
beyond the horizon. There is, according to legend, a boiling pot of gold
at one end. People look, but no one ever finds it. When a man looks for
something beyond his reach, his friends say he is looking for the pot of
gold at the end of the rainbow.”

[11] OSHA 1910 134 Appendix C, OSHA Respiratory Medical Evaluation
Questionnaire

[12] Information obtained from online resources provided by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) at www.cdc.gov
